Announcer, chapter two, mastering Crucial Conversations. The power of dialog, our lives begin to end the day we become silent about things that matter. Martin Luther King, Jr, to be honest, we didn't study our way into a discovery of crucial conversations. Instead, we stumbled into it over the years, we worked with dozens of leaders in a variety of industries who were trying to implement dramatic changes. Part of our consulting methodology involved helping them find opinion leaders embedded throughout their organizations who might be helpful in the effort. We did so in a pretty straightforward way. First, we asked people to name the two or three people they turned to first when they were struggling to get something done. Over the past decades, we've asked 10s of 1000s of people to identify the individuals and their organizations who knew how to make things happen when others felt stymied. We wanted to find those who were not just influential, but far more influential than the rest. Each time, as we compiled the names into a list, a pattern emerged. Lots of people were named by one or two colleagues. Some found their way onto five or six lists. These were people who were good at influence, but not good enough to be widely identified as top opinion leaders. And then there were the handful who were named 30 or more times. These were the best, the ones who could make big things happen in their areas. Some were managers and supervisors. Many were not one of the opinion leaders we became particularly interested in meeting was named Kevin. He was the only one of eight vice presidents in his company to be identified as exceedingly influential. We wanted to know why, so we watched him at work. At first, Kevin didn't do anything remarkable. In truth, he looked like every other VP. He answered his phone, talked to his direct reports, and continued about his pleasant, but routine routine. The startling discovery, after trailing Kevin for almost a week, we began to wonder if he really did act in ways that set him apart from others, or if his influence was simply a matter of popularity. And then we followed Kevin into a meeting. Kevin his peers and their boss were deciding on a new location for their offices. Would they move across town, across the state, or across the country? The first two execs presented their arguments for their top choices, and as expected, their points were greeted by penetrating questions from the full team. No vague claim went unclarified, no unsupported reasoning unquestioned. Then Chris the CEO pitched his preference one that was both unpopular and potentially disastrous. However, when people tried to disagree or push back, Chris responded poorly. Since he was the big boss, he didn't exactly have to browbeat people to get what he wanted. Instead, he became slightly defensive. First, he raised an eyebrow, then he raised his finger, finally, he raised his voice just a little. It wasn't long until people stopped questioning him, and Chris's inadequate proposal was quietly accepted. Well, almost that's when Kevin spoke up. His words were simple enough, something like, Hey, Chris, can I check something out with you? The reaction was stunning. Everyone in the room stopped breathing, but Kevin ignored the apparent terror of his colleagues and plunged on ahead. In the next few minutes, he, in essence, told the CEO that he appeared to be violating his own decision making guidelines. He was subtly using his power to move the new offices to his hometown. Kevin continued to explain what he saw happening, and when he finished the first minutes of this delicate exchange, Chris was quiet for a moment, then he nodded, you're absolutely right. He finally concluded, I have been trying to force my opinion on you. Let's back up and try again. This was a crucial conversation, and Kevin played no games whatsoever. He didn't resort to silence like his colleagues, nor did he try to force his arguments on others. Somehow, he managed to achieve absolute candor, but he did so in a way that showed deep respect for Chris. It was a remarkable thing to watch. As a result, the team chose a far more effective location, and Kevin's boss appreciated his caring coaching. When Kevin was done, one of his peers turned to us and said, Did you see how he did that? If you want to know how he gets things done, figure out what he just did. So we did. In fact, we spent the next 30 years discovering what Kevin and people like him do. What typically set them apart from the rest of the pack was their ability to avoid what we came to call the fool's choice. You see, Kevin's contribution was not his insight. Almost everyone could see what was happening. People knew they were allowing themselves to be steamrolled into making a bad decision. But all of them except Kevin believed they had to make a choice between two bad alternatives. Option one, speak up and turn the most power. Powerful person in the company into their sworn enemy. Option two, suffer in silence and make a bad decision that might ruin the company. The mistake most of us make in our Crucial Conversations is we believe that we have to choose between telling the truth and keeping a friend. As we suggested in the previous chapter, we begin believing in the fool's choice from an early age, for instance, we learned that when grandma served an enormous wedge of her famous brussels sprouts pie a la mode and then asked, Do you like it, she really meant, do you like me? When we answered honestly and saw the look of hurt and horror on her face, we made a decision that affected the rest of our lives. From this day forward, I will be alert for moments when I must choose between candor and kindness beyond the fool's choice, and from that day forward, we found plenty of those moments with bosses, colleagues, loved ones and line cutters, drawing out lag time became a way of life, and the consequences followed. That's why our research with Kevin and hundreds of individuals like him was so important. We discovered a core group of human beings who refused to make the fool's choice. Their goal was different from your average person's. When Kevin spoke up, his implicit question was, How can I be 100% honest with Chris and at the same time be 100% respectful? Following that consequential meeting, we began looking for more Kevins, and we found them all over the world. We found them in industry, government, academia and non profit organizations. They were fairly easy to locate because they were almost always among the most influential employees in their organizations. Not only did they refuse to make the fool's choice, but they were also far more skilled in how they acted than their colleagues. But what exactly did they do? Kevin wasn't that different from his colleagues? Could what he did be learned by others? To answer this question, let's first explore what Kevin was able to achieve. This will help us see where we're trying to go. Then we'll examine the tools that effective communicators routinely use and learn to apply them to our own Crucial Conversations. Dialog. When it comes to Crucial Conversations, skilled people find a way to get all relevant information from themselves and others out into the open. That's it. At the core of every successful conversation lies the free flow of information. People openly and honestly express their opinions, share their feelings and articulate their theories. They willingly and capably share their views even when their ideas are controversial or unpopular. It's the one thing that Kevin and the other extremely effective communicators we studied were routinely able to achieve. What they do is effectively create a dialog. As we talk about dialog, we're faced with two questions. First, how does this free flow of meaning lead to success? Second, what can you do to encourage meaning to flow freely? We'll explain the relationship between the free flow of meaning and success in this chapter. The second question, What must you do in order to achieve dialog when it matters the most? Will take us the rest of the book to answer, filling the pool of shared meaning. Each of us enters conversations with our own thoughts and feelings about the topic at hand. This unique combination makes up our personal pool of meaning. This pool not only informs us, but also propels our every action when two or more of us enter Crucial Conversations, by definition, we don't share the same pool. Our opinions differ. I believe one thing, you another. I have one history, and you another. People who are skilled at dialog do their best to make it safe for everyone, to add meaning to the shared pool, even ideas that at first glance appear controversial or wrong, obviously everyone doesn't agree with every idea, people simply do their best to ensure that all ideas find their way into the open. As the pool of shared meaning grows, it helps people in two ways. First, as individuals are exposed to more accurate and relevant information, they make better choices. In a very real sense, the pool of shared meaning is a measure of a group's IQ. The larger the shared pool, the smarter the decisions. On the other hand, we've all seen what happens when the shared pool is dangerously shallow, when people purposely withhold meaning from one another, individually smart people can do collectively stupid things. For example, a client of ours shared the following story, a woman checked into the hospital to have a tonsillectomy, and the surgical team erroneously removed a portion of her foot. How could this tragedy happen? In fact, why is it that nearly 22,000 hospital deaths in the United States each year stem from human. In error, in part because many health care professionals are afraid to speak their minds. In this case, no fewer than seven people wondered why the surgeon was working on the foot but said nothing. Meaning didn't flow freely because people were afraid to speak up. Of course, hospitals don't have a monopoly on fear. In every instance where bosses are smart, highly paid, confident and outspoken, ie, most of the world, people tend to hold back their opinions rather than risk angering someone in a position of power. On the other hand, when people feel comfortable speaking up and meaning does flow freely, the shared pool can dramatically increase a group's ability to make better decisions. Consider what happened to Kevin's group as everyone on the team began to explain his or her opinion, people formed a clearer and more complete picture of the circumstances as they began to understand the whys and wherefores of different proposals they built off one another, eventually, as one idea led to the next, and then to the next, they came up with an alternative that no one had originally thought of and that all whole heartedly supported as a result of the free flow of meaning, the whole final choice was truly greater than the sum of the original parts. In short, the pool of shared meaning is the birthplace of synergy. As people sit through an open discussion, they understand why the shared solution is the best option, and they're committed to act. Kevin and the other VPS didn't buy into their final choice simply because they were involved. They bought in because they understood, conversely, when people aren't involved, when they sit back during touchy conversations, they're rarely committed to the final decision. Since their ideas remain in their heads and their opinions never make it into the pool, they end up quietly criticizing and passively resisting. Similarly, when others force their ideas into the pool, people have a hard time accepting the information. They may say they're on board, but then walk away and follow through half heartedly, to quote Samuel Butler, he that complies against his will is of his own opinion. Still, the time you spend up front establishing a shared pool of meaning is more than paid for by faster, more unified and more committed action later on, for example, if Kevin and the other leaders had not been committed to their relocation decision, terrible consequences would have followed. Some people would have agreed to move. Others would have dragged their feet. Some would have held heated discussions in the hallways. Others would have said nothing and then quietly fought the plan. More likely than not, the team would have been forced to meet again, discuss again and decide again. Since only one person favored the decision, then the decision affected everyone. Don't get us wrong. We're not suggesting that every decision be made by consensus or that the boss shouldn't take part in or even make the final choice. We're simply suggesting that whatever the decision making method, the greater the shared meaning in the pool, the better the choice, the more the unity and the stronger the conviction. Whoever makes the choice. Every time we find ourselves arguing, running away, or otherwise acting in an ineffective way, it's because we don't know how to share meaning. Instead of engaging in healthy dialog, we play costly games. For instance, sometimes we move to silence. We play salute and stay mute. That is, we don't confront people in positions of authority or at home. We may play freeze your lover with this tortured technique we give loved ones the cold shoulder in order to get them to treat us better. What's the logic in that sometimes we rely on hints, sarcasm, innuendo and looks of disgust to make our points. We play the martyr and then pretend we're actually trying to help, or maybe afraid to confront an individual. We blame an entire team for a problem, hoping the message will hit the right target. Whatever the technique, the overall method is the same. We withhold meaning from the pool. We go to silence. On other occasions, not knowing how to stay in dialog. We try to force our meaning into the pool. We rely on emotional violence, anything from verbal sniping to intellectual bullying to outright verbal attacks. We act like we know everything, hoping people will believe our arguments. We discredit others. We use force to get our way. We borrow power from the boss. We hit people with biased monologs. We make hurtful comments. The goal of all these behaviors is the same, to compel others to our point of view. So to sum up, when stakes are high, opinions vary and emotions run strong. We're often at our worst. In order to move to our best, we have to find a way to explain what is in each of our personal pools of meaning, especially our high stakes, sensitive and controversial thoughts and opinions, and to get others to share their pools to achieve. Us, we have to develop the tools that make it safe for us to discuss these issues and to come to a shared pool of meaning. Dialog skills are learnable. Here's the really good news, the skills for mastering high stakes interactions are quite easy to spot and moderately easy to learn a well handled, Crucial Conversation, all but leaps out at you when you see someone enter the dangerous waters of a high stakes, emotional, controversial discussion and do a particularly good job, Your natural reaction is to step back in awe. What starts as a doomed discussion ends up with a healthy resolution. It can take your breath away. More important. Not only are dialog skills easy to spot, but they're also fairly easy to learn. That's where we're going next. We've isolated and captured the skills of the dialog gifted over decades of research. First, we followed around Kevin and others like him. When conversations turned crucial, we took detailed notes afterward, we compared our observations, tested our hypotheses and honed our models until we found the skills that consistently explained the success of brilliant communicators. Finally, we combined our theories, models and skills into a package of learnable tools, tools for talking when stakes are high. We then taught these skills and watched as key performance indicators and relationships improved. Now we're ready to share what we've learned. Stay with us as we explore how to transform Crucial Conversations from frightening events into interactions that yield success and results. It's the most important set of skills you'll ever master. My crucial conversation by Bobby R my crucial conversation began on the night before my first deployment to Iraq in 2004 there was a lot of tension between members of my family caused by past events and conflicting perspectives. The stress of my leaving to combat only increased the tension on that night, one well intended but deeply loaded question for my father sent me through the roof. The way I reacted over the next couple of hours started a downward spiral that affected my entire family, siblings, cousins, aunts, uncles, parents, children and grandparents all took sides. My family ties continued to unravel as I led a platoon of soldiers through the streets of Baghdad, my wife was home with our one year old and pregnant with our second during my tour, additional family encounters only worsened the situation, and after 14 months of combat, I came home to a family that was completely broken at every existing generation, the silence between me and my father continued for five years. Crucial Conversations saved my relationship with my parents. A neighbor who was a crucial conversations trainer invited me to his class before my third tour in Iraq. A couple of weeks before I deployed, I reached out to my father to let him know about the two children he had never seen and that I was leaving for combat. I told him I couldn't make the same mistake I had made five years earlier, and we agreed to meet on a beautiful sunset balcony in Houston. My dad and I spent three tense hours dealing with a lot of pain and built up resentment. I kept in mind what I had been taught, and rather than compromising candor, tried my best to create conditions where we could both be honest and respectful. It was incredibly difficult. Sometimes the honesty threatened to put us right back into the angry state that got us there. But I kept focusing on what I really wanted, a relationship with my family at the end of the conversation, we met my mom for dinner. She had been the most hurt by my anger in the past, and was skeptical. She was sure I was still the argumentative, sarcastic, spiteful and arrogant child of my youth. She gave me a chance based on my father's assessment of my respect, remorse and clear demonstration of mutual purpose. I am now in a loving relationship with my wife, four children and parents. We have agreed to never bury our concerns in silence again. I attribute the relationship I have today to the success of that one crucial conversation on the balcony. Had I not practiced what I had learned my relationship with my father would have died from anger and indifference. That conversation happened because of a friend who introduced me to Crucial Conversations. Here's where we're going. Throughout the remainder of the book, we'll explore the tools people use to help create the conditions of dialog. While Crucial Conversations rarely follow a neat path, the principles and skills we will share are generally applied in a predictable order. For example, part one of the audio book What to do before you open your mouth, describes the preparation principles, the things we need to do before we begin to ensure we are primed for an effective conversation and there is little chance. Healthy dialog if you don't focus on the right problem, which we cover in chapter three, choose your topic. Get your motives right, which we cover in chapter four, start with heart and manage your emotions. Which is discussed in chapter five. Master my stories. Part two is called How to Open your mouth. Here, we'll teach you to recognize early signs of problems. In chapter six, learn to look next. We'll share how to create the condition that allows you to talk with almost anyone about almost anything. Safety. This will be discussed in chapter seven. Make it safe. We then get tactical teaching strategies for sharing your views in a way that is both truthful and least likely to provoke defensiveness. This we cover in chapter eight, state my path, and for helping others to productively express their views as well, which we cover in chapter nine. Explore others paths. Then we take you to a remarkable place in the US Rocky Mountains, where we learn lessons for minimizing the misery we feel when receiving tough feedback. This is Chapter 10. Retake your pen. In part three, how to finish. We'll share two important tools for finishing strong. Chapter 11, move to action as you listen on in chapter 12, yeah, bud, you will learn the key to skills of talking, listening and acting together in a way that improves both relationships and results. Finally, we'll tie all the theories and skills together in chapter 13, putting it all together by providing both a model and an extended example, we are confident that as you not only listen but practice what you learn, you will gain greater and greater confidence in talking when stakes are high, summary mastering Crucial Conversations, when Facing a Crucial Conversation, most of us unconsciously make a fool's choice. We think we have to choose between telling the truth and keeping a friend. Skilled communicators resist this false trade off and look for ways to do both. They look for a way to be both 100% honest and 100% respectful at the same time. In short, they look for a way to get to dialog, a condition where meaning flows freely between parties, resulting in a larger pool of information shared by all a larger shared pool of meaning leads to better decisions, better relationships and more unified action. The remainder of this book shares learnable skills designed to help you get to dialog during your most crucial moments. 

