Chapter Six, learn to look how to notice when safety is at risk. I have known 1000 scamps, but I never met one who considered himself so self knowledge isn't so common. Ouidah, let's start this chapter by visiting a failed crucial conversation. You and your team have been working hard on a proposal for a company acquisition. Your manager is now taking the proposal to the steering committee. He has invited you to sit in on the meeting. He has made it clear that your role here is to listen and observe. You're excited for a couple of reasons. First, you believe in your team's recommendation and want to see how the steering committee responds. Second, this is the first time you'll see the organization's leadership team in action. It's exhilarating to be included. The first thing you notice is you take your chair next to a wall on one side of the room is where all the executives are sitting. Not surprisingly, the CEO Karine, is at the head of the rather large table. There doesn't necessarily seem to be much order to where everyone else sits, but you do notice that Marco, the CFO is at the far end of the table. You've heard through the grapevine that those two have a bit of a contentious relationship. The meeting opens and Corrine asks your manager to present the proposal. He does a great job outlining the recommendations as his colleagues listen attentively, he opens it up for questions, someone you aren't sure who asks a probing but friendly question. Your manager responds, but before he can ask for other questions, Corrine jumps in with her opinion. The discussion continues like this for some time. Someone makes a comment. Corine responds, another comment, another interjection from Corrine. You notice that Corrine comments about virtually every other person's comments, never letting the discussion go too far without her input. Finally, Marco speaks up. He summarizes what he has heard, clarifies that he understands corrines position, and then forcefully tells her why she is wrong. She pushes back on him. He pushes back on her. Everyone is watching the tense exchange between the two just when you think they're about to start yelling, Corinne pulls back tables the discussion and ends the meeting. Marco pushes his chair back from the table with the force and urgency of someone jumping out of the way of an oncoming bus and stalks from the room without saying anything to anyone. As you and your manager take the elevator back down to your floor, you say, Wow, is it often like that? Pretty much he responds. It always seems to start off well enough, but then inevitably, it deteriorates. Those two just can't work together. From the moment Marco opens his mouth, it's a train wreck. How? So you ask, wondering what your manager is seeing. Well, by the end, it was easy to see how upset they each were. They were constantly interrupting and talking over each other, their voices getting louder and louder. But even before that, from Marcos first comment, I knew it would go badly. He starts with such absolutes, it's always been like this that will never work. The guy is probably the smartest person on the team, and he knows it that language always, never it inevitably gets corrines Back up. You think about this for a minute and then say, I definitely agree, the warning signs were there from the moment Marco started talking. But, you know, I think there were a few things that happened even earlier that set the conversation off in the wrong direction. Really, your manager replies with surprise. I thought it was going pretty well until Marco started talking. What did you see before that? Well, you start thoughtfully. It struck me as interesting that Corrine commented on almost everyone else's comments. You would say something, then she would say something, then someone else, then Karine again. Sometimes she even jumped in and cut someone off in order to get her comment in. Oh, sure. Your manager says, but that is just how Corrine is. She's really passionate about things and wants to engage in dialog with all of us. Hmm. You say, Well, that may be true, that she says she wants to have everyone weigh in, but I think her jumping in all the time is impacting the conversation. She's really controlling the pace and direction of the dialog. I wonder if that's part of what makes Marco come in so strong. I've never thought about it or really even noticed that before your manager says, I guess I'll have to watch for it next time the elevator dings and you're headed in separate directions, watch for conditions. The sooner you notice you're not in dialog, the easier it is to get back, and the lower the costs. The sad corollary is that the longer it takes to notice you're not in dialog, the harder it is to get back and the higher the costs. Yet most of us have trouble noticing the early warning signs of declining communication during Crucial Conversations. The key to maintaining dialog is to learn to dual process. Not only do you have to be attentive to the content of the conversation, what is being said, but you also have to skillfully observe the process, how it. Being said. When stakes get high, we get so caught up in what we're saying that it can be nearly impossible to pull ourselves out of the argument. As a result, we don't see what's happening to ourselves and to others, even when we are startled by what's going on, enough so that we think Yipes. This has turned ugly. Now what we may not know what to look for in order to turn things around, we may not see enough of what's happening. How could we be smack dab in the middle of a heated debate and not really see what's going on? A metaphor might help. It's like fly fishing for the first time with an experienced angler, your guide keeps telling you to cast your fly six feet upstream from that brown trout just out there. Only you can't see a brown trout just out there. She can That's because she knows what to look for. You think you do? You think you need to look for a brown trout in reality. You need to look for the distorted image of a brown trout that's under water while the sun is reflecting in your eyes. You have to look for elements other than the thing that your parents have stuffed and mounted over the fireplace. It takes both knowledge and practice to know what to look for and then actually see it. So what do you look for when caught in the middle of a crucial conversation? What do you need to see in order to catch problems before they become too severe? It helps to watch for three different conditions the moment a conversation turns crucial signs that people don't feel safe, silence or violence and your own style under stress. Let's consider each of these conversation killers in turn. Learn to spot Crucial Conversations first, stay alert for the moment a conversation turns from a routine or harmless discussion into a crucial one. In a similar vein, as you anticipate entering a tough conversation, be aware of the fact that you're about to enter the danger zone. Otherwise you can easily get sucked into silly games before you realize what's happened. And as we suggested earlier. The further you stray off track, the harder it can be to return, and the higher the costs to help catch problems early, reprogram your mind to pay attention to the signs that suggest you're in a crucial conversation. Some people first notice physical signals. Think about what happens to your body when conversations get tough. Everyone is a little bit different. What are your cues? Maybe your stomach gets tight or your eyes get dry. Whatever they are, learn to look at them as signs to step back, slow down and start with heart before things get out of hand. Others notice their emotions before they notice signs in their body. They realize they are scared, hurt, defensive or angry, and are beginning to react to or suppress these feelings. These emotions can also be great cues to tell you to step back, slow down and take steps to turn your brain back on. Some people's first cue is behavioral. For them, it's like an out of body experience. They see themselves raising their voice, pointing their finger like a loaded weapon, or becoming very quiet. It's only then that they realize how they're feeling. So take a moment to think about some of your toughest conversations. What cues can you use to recognize that your brain is beginning to disengage and you're at risk of moving away from healthy dialog, learn to look for safety problems. People who are gifted at dialog keep a constant vigil on safety. They pay attention to the content, and they watch for signs that people are becoming fearful when friends, loved ones or colleagues move away from healthy dialog by either forcing their opinions into the pool, or purposely keeping their ideas out of the pool. The best at dialog immediately turn their attention to why others might not feel safe when it's safe, you can say anything. Here's why. Gifted communicators keep a close eye on safety. Dialog calls for the free flow of meaning, period, and nothing kills the flow of meaning like fear. When you fear, people aren't buying into your ideas. You start pushing too hard. When you fear you may be harmed in some way, you start withdrawing and hiding. Both these reactions, fight and flight, are motivated by the same emotion, fear. On the other hand, if you make it safe enough, you can talk about almost anything, and people will listen if you don't fear that you're being attacked or humiliated. You, yourself can hear almost anything and not become defensive. This is a pretty remarkable claim. Think about it. We're suggesting that people rarely become defensive simply because of what you're saying. They only become defensive when they no longer feel safe, or when they question why you're saying the things you are specifically they begin to speculate either about your respect. Is this message a sign of disrespect your intent? Does this message tell me you have malicious motives toward me or both? Either way? Say the problem is not the content of your message but the condition of the conversation. As we saw earlier, from the time we are quite small, we begin to conclude that you can't be both honest and respectful simultaneously. In essence, we conclude that there are some messages you just can't give to some people, and over time, that list of messages gets longer and longer until we find ourselves handling most crucial conversations badly. If what we're suggesting here is true, then the problem is not the message. The problem is that you and I fail to help others feel safe hearing the message. If you can learn to see when people start to feel unsafe, you can take action to fix it. That means the first challenge is to simply see and understand that safety is at risk. Think about your own experience. Can you remember receiving really tough feedback from someone at some point in your life and not becoming defensive? Instead, you absorbed the feedback. You reflected on it. You allowed it to influence you. If so, ask yourself, why? Why in this instance, were you able to take potentially threatening feedback so well? If you're like the rest of us, it's because you believe the other person had your best interest in mind. In addition, you respected the other person's opinion. You felt safe receiving the feedback because you trusted the motives and ability of the other person. You didn't need to defend yourself from what was being said, even if you didn't like what the person was saying. On the other hand, if you don't feel safe, you can't take feedback. It's as if the pool of meaning has a lid on it. What do you mean? I look good? Is that some kind of joke? Are you insulting me when you don't feel safe? Even well intended comments are suspect. Safety isn't synonymous with comfort. At this point, it is worth noting that feeling safe in a conversation is not synonymous with feeling comfortable. We'll define safety more in the next chapter, but for now, we want to be clear about what safety isn't crucial. Conversations are by definition hard conversations we and others have to stretch in these conversations, often venturing into new territory and feeling some degree of vulnerability. The measure of whether a conversation is safe is not how comfortable I feel it is whether meaning is flowing. Do I and others feel like we can share our meaning? Have that meaning heard and also listen honestly and respectfully to each other? If you can do that, if meaning is flowing honestly and respectfully. You know safety is there. When it's unsafe, you start to go blind, as we know, when your emotions start cranking up, key brain functions start shutting down. When you feel genuinely threatened, your peripheral vision actually narrows until you can scarcely see beyond what's right in front of you by pulling yourself out of the content of an argument and looking for signs that safety is at risk, you re engage your brain, and your full vision returns, as we suggested earlier. When you give yourself a new problem to consider, keep alert for signs that safety is at risk. You affect your brain functioning. Your Higher reasoning centers stay more active, and you're far less likely to be dumbed down and far more likely to succeed in your Crucial Conversations. Don't let safety problems lead you astray. When others begin to feel unsafe, they start acting in annoying ways. They make fun of you, insult you, or steamroll you with their arguments in such moments, you should be thinking to yourself, hey, they're feeling unsafe. I need to do something, maybe make it safer. Unfortunately, more often than not, instead of taking their attack as a sign that safety is at risk, you take it at its face as an attack. I am under attack. You think, then the dumb part of your brain kicks in and you respond in kind, or maybe you try to escape. Either way, you're not dual processing and trying to restore safety. Instead, you're becoming part of the problem as you get pulled into the fight. Imagine the magnitude of what we're suggesting here. We're asking you to fight your natural tendency to respond in kind, and instead think, Ah, that's a sign that the other person feels unsafe. And then what do something to make it safe? Just to be crystal clear, we are not asking you to tolerate abusive behavior. We are asking you to consider the cause of that behavior. Sure some jerks are, in fact, truly jerks deep down and all the way through. But let's be honest. Have you ever lost your temper, yelled at someone in the heat of the moment, interrupted someone when you just couldn't take it anymore, used your power as a parent, boss or expert inappropriately to get what you want. I, you know, acted like a jerk. Probably we all have at times. And guess what? We aren't jerks. We're just people who, in a tough moment, responded to a lack of safety with aggression. We see it in ourselves. We need to give people the respect and grace to see it in them. Obviously, this can be difficult, but it's worth it. These skills are the pivot point for everything that follows in the process of creating dialog. They're the gateway to gaining all the benefits that come to those who are skilled at crucial conversations. Imagine increased influence, enhanced relationships, stronger teams and more effective leadership turn on your capacity to recognize and respond to safety problems. In the next chapter, we'll explore how to respond for now, simply learn to look for safety and then be curious instead of angry or frightened. Learn to identify the two kinds of behavior that will clue you into the fact that someone's feeling unsafe, we refer to them as silence and violence. Silence and violence. As people begin to feel unsafe, they start down one of two unhealthy paths. They move either to silence, withholding meaning from the pool, or to verbal violence, trying to force meaning into the pool that part we know, but let's add a little more detail, just as a little knowledge of what to look for can turn blurry water into a brown trout. Knowing a few of the common forms of silence and violence helps you see safety problems when they first start to happen. That way, you can step out, restore safety and return to dialog before the damage is too great. Silence. Silence consists of any act to purposely withhold information from the pool of meaning. It's almost always done as a means of avoiding potential problems, and it always restricts the flow of meaning. Methods range from playing verbal games to avoiding a person entirely. The three most common forms of silence Are masking, avoiding and withdrawing. Masking consists of understating or selectively showing our true opinions. Sarcasm, sugar coating and couching are some of the more popular forms. I think your idea is brilliant. Yeah, that's it. I just worry that others won't catch the subtle nuances. Some ideas come before their time, so expect some minor resistance, real meaning your idea is insane, and people will fight it with their last breath. Oh, yeah, that'll work like a charm, accompanied by an eye roll. Offer a people a discount, and they'll drive all the way across town just to save six cents on a box of soap. Real meaning, what a dumb idea. Avoiding involves steering completely away from sensitive subjects we talk but without addressing the real issues. How does your new suit look? Well, you know that Blue's my favorite color. Real meaning, what happened? Did you buy your clothes at the circus? Speaking of ideas for cost cutting, what if we diluted the coffee or used both sides of our copier paper? Real meaning, if I offer trivial suggestions, perhaps we can avoid discussing sensitive things like staff inefficiency. Withdrawing means pulling out of a conversation altogether. We either exit the conversation or exit the room. Excuse me, I've got to take this call real meaning. I'd rather gnaw off my own arm than spend one more minute in this useless meeting. Sorry, I'm not going to talk about how to split up the phone bill again. I'm not sure our friendship can stand another battle exit real meaning we can't talk about even the simplest of topics without arguing violence. Violence consists of any verbal strategy that attempts to convince or control others or compel them to your point of view, it violates safety by trying to force meaning into the pool. Methods range from name calling and monologuing to making threats. The three most common forms are controlling, labeling and attacking. Controlling consists of coercing others to your way of thinking. It's done through either forcing your views on others or dominating the conversation by interrupting, overstating your facts, speaking in absolutes, changing subjects, or using directive questions, among other strategies. There's not a person in the world who hasn't bought one of these things. They're the perfect gift. Real meaning, I can't justify spending our hard earned savings on this expensive toy, but I really want it. We tried their product, but it was an absolute disaster. Everyone knows that they can't deliver on time and that they offer the worst customer service on the planet. Real meaning, I'm not certain of the real facts, so I'll use hyperbole to get your attention. Labeling is putting a label on people or ideas so we can dismiss them under a general stereotype or category. You. That idea. It might have worked in the 1990s but no one who actually cares about quality and customer service would ever implement that kind of a plan today. Real meaning, I can't argue my case on its merits, so to get what I want, I'll attack you personally. Are you serious? Only a insert name of the opposing political party would think that's a good idea. Real meaning, if I pretend that all people from the political persuasion of posing mine are somehow bad and wrong, I won't have to explain anything. Attacking speaks for itself. Your motive goes from winning the argument to making the other person suffer. Tactics include belittling and threatening. Try that stupid little stunt and see what happens. Real meaning, I will get my way on this, even if I have to bad mouth you and threaten some vague punishment, don't listen to a word Jim is saying. I'm sorry, Jim, but I'm onto you. You're just trying to make it better for your team while making the rest of us suffer. I've seen you do it before. You're a real jerk. You know that? I'm sorry, but someone has to have the guts to tell it like it is meaning to get my way. I'll say bad things about you and then pretend that I'm the only one with any integrity. Look for your style under stress. You've been paying attention to determine when a conversation turns crucial, and to identify signs that safety is at risk. There is one more thing you need to watch your own behavior. This is perhaps the most difficult element to watch closely. Most people have trouble pulling themselves away from the tractor beam of the argument at hand. After all, it's not like you can actually step out of your body and observe yourself. You're on the wrong side of your eyeballs, low self monitors. The truth is, we all have trouble monitoring our own behavior at times. We usually lose any semblance of social sensitivity when we become so consumed with ideas and causes that we lose track of what we're doing. We try to bully our way through. We speak when we shouldn't. We withdraw into a punishing silence? We're basically the guy in the jack. Handy story quoted here. People were always talking about how mean this guy was who lived on our block. But I decided to go see for myself. I went to his door, but he said he wasn't the mean guy. The mean guy lived in that house over there. No, you stupid idiot. I said, That's my house. Unfortunately, when you fail to monitor your own behavior, you can look pretty silly. For example, you're talking to your spouse about the fact that he or she left you sitting at the auto repair shop for over an hour. Your spouse says it was a simple misunderstanding and exclaims, you don't have to get angry. Then you utter those famous words, I'm not angry. Of course, you're spraying spit as you shout out your denial, and the vein on your forehead is swelled to the size of a teenage Python. You quite naturally don't see the inconsistency in your response. You're in the middle of the whole thing, and you don't appreciate it one bit when your spouse laughs at you your style under stress. What kind of self monitor Are you? One good way to increase your self awareness is to explore your own style under stress. You won't be able to do this while listening to this audio book, but we encourage you to visit crucialconversations.com where you can take this 30 item test that will help you to recognize and to work on your own style under stress. As we proceed, we'll assume you've taken that test and teach you how to interpret and apply the results. What your score means, your style under stress. Score will show you which forms of silence or violence you turn to most often. Your silence and violence scores give you a measure of how frequently you fall into these less than perfect strategies. It's actually possible to score high in both a medium or high score, a score of one or two in one of the domains on the test means you sometimes or frequently use this technique. Your dialog skills score is organized by concept and chapter in the book, so you can decide which chapters in the book might benefit you the most. The nine domains in the score sheet that you'll be receiving reflect your skills in each of the corresponding skill chapters. If you score high a score of one or two in one of these domains, you're already quite skilled in this area, at least in the conversations you were considering while you scored the test. Note that your answers might be different if you thought about a more challenging situation. If you score low or moderate a zero or a one, you may want to pay special attention to these chapters. Your score doesn't represent an unalterable character trait or a genetic propensity. It's merely a measure of your behavior under the circumstances you thought about when you answered the questions, and no matter your score, you can change that. In fact, people who take this book seriously will practice the skills in each chapter, and eventually they will change they also account. Occasionally retake the test for especially challenging relationships they are facing. As they do so, they become more and more competent at applying the skills under more and more taxing situations, and as they do so, their lives change for the better. Once you've taken the test yourself, you might want to ask people who know you well to take it with you. In mind, does your assessment of your style under stress match how others see you, if not pay attention to the discrepancies and watch for what others are seeing learning to be a good self monitor may take some time looking virtually for many of us, more and more of our conversations and even our Crucial Conversations, are happening virtually mediated through technology. We're calling, texting, emailing and video conferencing more than ever. So how do you learn to look when you aren't face to face? Learning to look for signs that safety is at risk in a virtual environment is not actually that different from doing so in a face to face environment. The very best communicators realize that at its heart, learning to look is about expanding your data stream. You see more, and as well, you understand more about what you see. The obvious challenge with most virtual communication is that our data stream is severely limited. Much of what we see when we're talking with people is communicated through their non verbals, things like their body language, their tone of voice, or where they're looking. For example, those non verbal signals are important indicators that help us make sense of what they're saying. When a conversation moves to the telephone or to email, our data stream becomes more like a data trickle. The solution is always the same. A better data stream gives you more to see in a conversation. If you know you need to have a crucial conversation, choose the medium that will give you the most bandwidth. For many this is a face to face conversation. When that isn't possible, we often go next to video conferencing and then a phone call. Eventually we get to email, text and instant messaging. With each step we know we are decreasing the data available to us. It's not ideal, but when is real life ideal? In real life, people manage teams on the other side of the world, aging parents live far away. Teenagers ignore your call, but Moments later, respond to a text. Aha, I knew you were looking right at your phone when my call came in. Crucial Conversations happen virtually every day, and when they do, the goal is always the same, expand the data stream. Learn to look for signs that safety is at risk. How do you expand your data stream? Start by asking for more data. For example, email, I haven't heard back from you in a couple of days in response to the email I sent you. I'm not sure how to interpret your silence. How are you feeling about the proposal telephone? I wish I could see your face right now. I don't know how you're hearing my message, and I would hate for you to misinterpret it. Can you help me understand what you're thinking right now? Direct message when I read the comment that you posted on my social media account, I wasn't sure how to take it. It seemed like you might be upset. Are you when you see signs of silence or violence in virtual communication? Ask for more data when you do, either people will add meaning to the pool about what they're feeling or thinking, or they'll hold back if they don't disclose more about how they're feeling that is its own confirming data. Then it's time to make it safe. The topic of the next chapter my Crucial Conversation. Tom e i am 55, years old, and we all know the saying you can't teach an old dog new tricks. I've worked in engineering and purchasing at the same company for 17 years. Throughout my career, I faced recurring interpersonal conflicts that resulted from frequent blow ups. I had always believed that completing the task was the most important thing, and that relationship damage was collateral damage. I could live with. My immediate supervisor had attended a Crucial Conversations class for the upper level managers at our company. The next step was to enroll the next level of managers and coaches. I don't coach anyone, but my supervisor enrolled me in the class anyway. My initial thought was, I really don't have the time for this stuff. But after the first few minutes, I realized that not only was I in the right place, but there was potential to learn something. I sat intently and absorbed as much as I could, as I learned to look, I replayed past incidents in my mind and saw where I had gone wrong. I realized I paid no attention when interacting with others. I didn't notice when they went to silence or violence. It was my way or the highway, and I would push until others went to silence, which to me, signaled agreement. During the training, I re read chapters and talked with classmates. I met with my learning partner, and he candidly told me that many of my co workers believed I had a wealth of knowledge, but avoided dealing with me because they didn't know when my next blow up would happen. Shortly after I completed the class, the director of engineering called me into his office. He placed. On probation because of feedback about my blow ups, I had three months to turn things around, or I was gone. I thought overnight about what I was going to do. I realized that what I had learned about myself in the Crucial Conversations class gave me the tools to fix the problem. Prior to the class, I had no clue about how to turn things around, and most likely would have walked out the door because of crucial conversations. However, I accepted the challenge. My coach told me that this would be a life change and not a temporary change, and I realized I had some fences to mend within the organization. I knew the road was going to be long and hard. Apologizing was difficult, but I wanted to change myself. It is now, a year later, and I still work for the same company. The things that have happened in the last year amaze me. I have mended all the fences, and at times, individuals have come to me for advice on dealing with situations. I have even had Crucial Conversations with managers of our company on behalf of others. My wife tells me the pattern of behavior of the last 30 years has changed things that used to cause me to blow up at home no longer do. And she says it's like being married to a different person. I am a different person. One even I like Crucial Conversations, has definitely changed me, and this old dog has learned new tricks. Summary, learn to look. When caught up in a crucial conversation, it's difficult to see exactly what's going on and why. When a discussion becomes stressful, we often end up doing the exact opposite of what works. We turn to the less healthy components of our style under stress to break from this insidious pattern, learn to look learn to look at content and conditions. Learn to look for when things become crucial. Learn to look for safety problems. Learn to look to see if others are moving toward silence or violence. And learn to look for outbreaks of your style under stress. You. 

