In chapter nine, explore others paths. How to listen when others blow up or clam up, one of the best ways to persuade others is with your ears by listening to them. Dean Rusk, so What risks do you all see in the current project plan? Sanj asks. He looks at the team assembled around the table and sees blank face after blank face. A few people are looking down, diligently concentrating on their doodling. Others meet his eyes for a moment before looking away. No one says anything. Sanj tries again. I think we all know how important this project is. That's why we're all here. If we're going to succeed, we have to be able to talk about the risks in the plan so that we can mitigate them. What are your concerns? More silence. Okay. Well, then great. That's just great. He says, with obvious sarcasm, I'll assume this is buttoned up. Good work, everyone. Now, let's go make it happen. As Sanj watches the team members gather their things and file out of the room, he looks down at the project plan again, a talented and experienced project manager, he has run several multi million dollar projects successfully, but never one quite like this. The project is already way behind, which is just one of the reasons the previous project manager was fired and Sanj was brought in. He's drafted a plan, but he knows he doesn't have the subject matter expertise here to fill in all the gaps. That's why he has a team, for Pete's sake. But when he asks for people's input, he just gets blank stares, nothing. Zilp zitch, nada. They just nod and tell him they like the plan. What else is he supposed to do? Unfortunately, variations of this scenario are all too common. You know you need to have a crucial conversation with someone about a key project plan or the trash piling up in front of your neighbor's door, or your son's new boyfriend and his colorful and slightly criminal history, whatever the topic, you know the conversation will be crucial. So you prepare carefully. You find your good intent, master your stories, and carefully state your path. You genuinely want to hear the other person's point of view. And when you ask what the other person means, the person either looks at you with deer in the headlights eyes and says nothing, or comes barreling at you with both guns blazing. After the meeting, Sanj calls Tony, one of the team members, to get his take on things. Hey, Tony, the group was pretty quiet in there. I'm not sure whether everyone really agrees with the project plan or not. What do you think of the risks? Oh, come on, Sanj. Tony replies, everyone knows this project is a train ride to disaster land. There is no way we get this out on time. And nobody is going to tell you to your face, because you know what, you're that guy, the guy from corporate, the guy with a plan, who's going to come in here on his white horse and save the day. Well, forget it, dude, this is a losing project, and the only question is, who will still be on the ship when it sinks? And I tell you this, it's not going to be me. I'm not taking the fall when this goes south. You are, wait a minute, that's not fair. You're on the team just as much as I am, and I'm not about to take the fall for this team's incompetence. Sanj jumps in loudly. I'm the only one who cares about this project. How do we get back to dialog? When others move to silence or violence, it can be tempting to join them there. After all, we've put in a lot of effort to open up the dialog and invite them to share their meaning when they don't share or don't share. Well, our natural tendency is to get frustrated. All this talking is just wasted effort, right? I do all the hard work and they blow up or clam up. Our Stories quickly spiral, and suddenly our motive shifts from wanting to understand their point of view to wanting to reinforce our own superiority. So what should you do? After all, you aren't the one going to silence or violence when others do damage to the pool of meaning by clamming up, refusing to speak their minds or blowing up communicating in a way that is abusive and insulting. Is there something you can do to get them back to dialog? The answer is resounding. It depends if you want to let a sleeping dog lie or, in this case, a potential train wreck go on a. Intended then say nothing. It's the other person who seems to have something to say but refuses to open up. It's the other person who's blown a cork. Run for cover. You can't take responsibility for someone else's thoughts and feelings, right? Then again, you'll never work through your differences until all parties freely add to the pool of meaning that requires the people who are blowing up or clamming up to participate as well. And while it's true that you can't force others to dialog, you can take steps to make it safer for them to do so, after all, that's why they've sought the security of silence or violence in the first place, they're afraid the dialog will make them vulnerable. Somehow they believe that if they engage in a real conversation with you, bad things will happen to them. Sanjas team, for instance, is running scared. The team knows the project is in trouble. After all, the last project manager just got fired, but people want to keep their jobs, and have found that keeping their heads down is the best way to do that restoring safety is your greatest hope for getting your relationships and your teams, projects and results back on track, explore others paths. In chapter seven, we recommended that whenever you notice safety is at risk, you should step out of the conversation and restore it. When you have offended others through a thoughtless act, apologize or if someone has misunderstood your intent, use contrasting explain what you do and don't intend. Finally, if you're simply at odds, find a mutual purpose. Now we'll add one more skill for helping restore safety explore other's paths. Since we've added a model of what's going on inside another person's head, the path to action, we now have a whole new tool for helping others feel safe. If we can find a way to let people know that it's okay to share their path to action, their facts and yes, even their nasty stories and ugly feelings, then they'll be more likely to open up exploring others' paths is a demonstration of our good intent, and that's why it's a powerful tool for Creating safety. Thus far, we have shared our good intent by telling people what it is. This now is our chance to show them our good intent, if our intent truly is to listen, to understand and to connect with them, how we act, not just what we say will create safety, but what does it take? Start with heart, get ready to listen, be sincere, to get others facts and stories into the pool of meaning. We have to invite them to share what's on their minds. We'll look at how to do this in a minute. For now, let's highlight the point that when you do invite people to share their views. You must mean it. For example, consider the following incident. A patient is checking out of a healthcare facility. The discharge clerk can tell that she's a bit uneasy, maybe even dissatisfied. Clerk, did everything go all right with the procedure? Patient mostly, if ever there was a hint that something was wrong, the term mostly has to be it. Clerk abruptly responds, Good, next. This is a classic case of pretending to be interested. It falls under the How are you today category of inquiries, meaning, please don't say anything of substance. I'm really just making small talk. When you ask people to open up, be prepared to listen. Be curious. When you do want to hear from others, and you should, because it adds to the pool of meaning, the best way to get at the truth is by making it safe for them to express the stories that are moving them to either silence or violence. This means that at the very moment when people become furious, we need to become curious. Rather than respond in kind, we need to wonder what's behind the ruckus. But how can we possibly act curious when others are either attacking us or heading for cover? People who routinely seek to find out why others are feeling unsafe do so because they've learned that getting at the source of fear and discomfort is the best way to return to dialog. They realize that the cure for silence or violence isn't to respond in kind, but to get at the underlying source. This calls for genuine curiosity at a time when you're likely to be feeling frustrated or angry. To illustrate what can happen as we exercise our curiosity, let's. Turn to our nervous patient. Clerk, did everything go all right with the procedure? Patient, mostly. Clerk, it sounds like you had a problem of some kind. Is that right? Patient, I'll say it hurt quite a bit. And besides, isn't the doctor like a little young to be practicing medicine. In this case, the patient is reluctant to speak up. Perhaps, if she shares her honest opinion, she'll insult the doctor, or maybe the loyal staff members will become offended to deal with the problem. The clerk lets the patient know as much with his tone is with his words that it's safe to talk and she opens up. Stay curious when people begin to share their volatile stories and feelings, we now face the risk of pulling out our own victim, villain and helpless stories to help us explain why they're saying what they're saying. Unfortunately, since it's rarely fun to hear other people's critical stories, we begin to assign negative motives to them for telling the stories. For example, clerk, well, aren't you picky? Read an article or two on the internet, and now you think you know more about medicine than someone who graduated from medical school. Your doctor graduated top of her class. She's one of the best you know, to avoid overreacting to others stories, stay curious. A good way to distract your brain from spinning up stories of others malicious motives is to give it a different problem to focus on, like this one. Why would a reasonable, rational and decent person say this? Then get busy trying to find an answer to this question. The tools in this chapter will help you do that. They'll help you actively retrace the other person's path to action until you see how it all fits together in a way you would find reasonable, rational and decent, and in most cases, you end up seeing that under the circumstances, the individual in question drew a fairly reasonable conclusion. Be patient when others are acting out their feelings and opinions through silence or violence, it's a good bet they're starting to feel the effects of adrenaline. Even if we do our best to safely and effectively respond to the other person's verbal attack, we still have to face up to the fact that it's going to take a little while for him or her to settle down. Say, for example, that a friend dumps out an ugly story and you treat it with respect and continue on with the conversation, even if the two of you now share a similar view, it may seem like your friend is still pushing too hard, while it's natural to move quickly from one thought to the next, strong emotions take a while to subside. Thoughts are all electricity. Emotions add chemistry once the chemicals that fuel emotions are released, they hang around in the bloodstream for a time, in some cases, long after thoughts have changed. So be patient while the chemistry catches up with the electricity. Allow people time to explore their path and then wait for their emotions to catch up with the safety you've created. Encourage others to retrace their path. Now that you've begun with an attitude of genuine curiosity, it's time to get to work. Your goal is to help others retrace their path to action. Recognize that we're joining the conversation at the end of their path to action. They've seen and heard things, told themselves a story or two, and generated a feeling, possibly a mix of fear, hurt and anger or disappointment, and now they're starting to act out their story. That's where we come in. Now, even though we may be hearing their first words were coming in somewhere near the end of their path. Every sentence has a history. Imagine a scenario where your favorite Mystery Show starts late because a football game runs long as the game wraps up, the screen crossfades from a trio of announcers to a starlet standing over a murder victim. Along the bottom of the screen are the discomforting words We now join this program already in progress, you shake the remote in exasperation. You've missed the entire setup for the rest of the program. You end up guessing about key facts, what happened just before you joined in crucial conversations can be similarly mysterious and frustrating when others are either in silence or violence, we're actually joining their path to action already in progress. Consequently, we've already missed the foundation of the story, and we're confused and. If we're not careful, we can become defensive. After all, not only are we joining late, but we're also joining at a time when the other person is starting to act offensively, break the cycle. And then guess what happens when we're on the receiving end of someone's accusations and cheap shots, we rarely think my they have a lot of strong emotions right now, they must have told an interesting story. I wonder what it was and what led to it. Instead, we match this unhealthy behavior, our genetically shaped, eons old defense mechanisms kick in, and we create our own hasty and unhelpful path to action. People who know better stop this dangerous cycle by stepping out of the interaction and making it safe for the other person to talk about his or her path to action. They encourage him or her to move away from the harsh feelings and knee jerk reactions and toward the root cause. In essence, they retrace the other person's path to action together, at their encouragement, the other person moves from his or her emotions to what he or she concluded and then to what he or she observed. When we help others retrace their path to its origins, not only do we help curb our reaction, but we also return to the place where feelings can be resolved. Their source, the facts and the story behind the emotion, inquiry skills. When, so far, we've suggested that when other people appear to have a story to tell and facts to share, it's our job to invite them to do so, our cues are simple. Others are going to silence or violence. We can see that they're feeling upset, fearful or angry. We can see that if we don't get at the source of their feelings, we'll end up suffering the effects of the feelings. These external reactions are our cues to do whatever it takes to help others retrace their path to action. How whatever we do to invite the other person to share his or her path, our invitation must be sincere. As hard as it sounds, we must be genuine in the face of hostility, fear or even abuse. Which leads us to the next question, what? What does it take to get others to share their path? In a word, it requires listening to encourage people to move from acting on their feelings to talking about their conclusions and observations. We must listen in a way that makes it safe for them to share their intimate thoughts. They must believe that when they share their thoughts, they won't offend us or be punished for speaking frankly. Ask mirror paraphrase or prime amp to encourage others to share their paths. We'll use four power listening tools. We call the four skills, power listening tools, because they are best remembered with the acronym amp, A, M, P, P, ask, mirror, paraphrase and prime. These tools work regardless of whether people are in silence or violence. Ask to get things rolling. The easiest and most straightforward way to encourage others to share their path to action is simply to invite them to express themselves. For example, often, all it takes to break an impasse is to seek to understand others' views when we show genuine interest, people feel less compelled to use silence or violence. Being willing to stop filling the pool with your meaning and invite the other person to talk about his or her view can go a long way toward getting to the source of the problem. Common invitations include what's going on. I'd really like to hear your opinion on this. Please let me know if you see it differently. Don't worry about hurting my feelings. I really want to hear your thoughts mirror to confirm feelings. If asking others to share their path doesn't open things up, mirroring can help build more safety in mirroring, we take the portion of the other person's path to action we have access to and make it safe for him or her to discuss it. All we have so far are actions and some hints about the other person's emotions. So we start there. We play the role of a mirror by describing how the other person looks or acts. Although we may not understand other stories or facts, we can see their actions and reflect them. Mirroring is most useful when the other person's tone of voice or gestures hints about the emotions behind them. I. Are inconsistent with his or her words. For example, Don't worry, I'm fine. But the other person's look and tone suggest he's actually quite the opposite. He's frowning, looking around and sort of kicking at the ground. Our response really from the way you're saying that it doesn't sound like you are. We explain that while the person may be saying one thing, his tone of voice or posture suggests something else, mirroring magnifies safety, because it demonstrates our genuine interest in and concern for others, we are paying attention so much so that we aren't just listening to what they are saying. We are noticing how they are saying it. When reflecting your observations, take care, to manage your tone of voice and delivery. It's not the fact that we're acknowledging others emotions that create safety. We create safety when our tone of voice says we're okay with them feeling the way they're feeling. If we do this well, they may conclude that, rather than acting out their emotions, they can confidently talk them out with us instead. So as we describe what we see, we have to do so calmly if we act upset or as if we're not going to like what others say. We don't build safety. We confirm their suspicions that they need to remain silent. Examples of mirroring include you say you're okay, but the tone of your voice sounds upset. You seem angry with me. You look nervous about confronting him. Are you sure you're willing to do it? Ironically, when you sincerely acknowledge someone is angry with you, the person often begins to feel less angry. When you validate someone's nervousness, the person feels less need to be nervous. Mirroring can help others begin to talk out rather than act out their emotions. Paraphrase to acknowledge the story. Asking and mirroring may help you get part of the other person's story out into the open. When you get a clue about why the person is feeling as he or she does, you can build additional safety by paraphrasing what you've heard. Be careful not to simply parrot back what was said instead, put the message in your own words, usually in an abbreviated form. Let's see if I've got this right. You're worried because the previous project manager was fired. You're wondering if you or others on the project team might be at risk as well. The key to paraphrasing, as with mirroring, is to remain calm and collected. Our goal is to make it safe, not to act horrified and suggest that the conversation is about to turn ugly. Stay focused on figuring out how a reasonable, rational and decent person could have created this path to action. This task can help keep you from becoming angry or defensive. Simply rephrase what the person said and do it in a way that suggests that it's okay. You're trying to understand and it's safe for him or her to talk candidly. Don't push too hard. Let's see where we are. We can tell that another person has more to share than he or she is currently sharing. He or she is going to silence or violence, and we want to know why. We want to get back to the source, the facts and the story, where we can solve the problem, to encourage the person to share. We've tried three listening tools. We've asked, mirrored and paraphrased, the person is still upset, but isn't explaining his or her stories or facts. Now what at this point we may want to back off. After a while our attempts to make it safe for others can start feeling as if we're pestering or prying. If we push too hard, we violate both purpose and respect others may think our purpose is merely to extract what we want from them and conclude that we don't care about them personally. So instead, we back off, rather than trying to get to the source of the other person's emotions, we either gracefully exit or ask what he or she wants to see happen. Asking people what they want helps them engage their brains in a way that moves to problem solving and away from either attacking or avoiding. It also helps reveal what they think the cause of the problem is prime when you're getting nowhere. On the other hand, there are times when you may conclude that others would like to open up, but still don't feel safe, or maybe they're still in violence, haven't come down from the adrenaline and aren't explaining why they're angry. When this is the case, you might want to try priming prime when you believe that the other person still has something to share. And might do so with a little more effort on your part. The power listening term priming comes from the expression priming the pump. If you've ever worked an old fashioned hand pump, you understand the metaphor. With a pump, you often have to pour some water into it to get it running, then it works just fine. When it comes to power listening, sometimes you have to offer your best guess at what the other person is thinking or feeling before you can expect him or her to do the same. You have to pour some meaning into the pool before the other person will respond in kind. A few years back, one of the authors was working with an executive team that had decided to add an afternoon shift to one of the company's work areas. The equipment wasn't being fully utilized, and the company couldn't afford to keep the area open without adding a three to midnight crew. This, of course, meant that the people currently working days would now have to rotate every two weeks to afternoons. It was a tortured but necessary choice. As the execs held a meeting to announce their unpopular change, the existing employees went silent. They were obviously unhappy, but nobody would say anything. The operations manager was afraid that people would misinterpret the company's actions as nothing more than a grab for more money. In truth, the area was losing money, and the decision was made with the current employees in mind. With no second shift, there would be no jobs. He also knew that asking people to rotate shifts and to be away from loved ones during the afternoon and evening would cause horrible burdens, as people sat silently fuming, the executive did his best to get them to talk so that they wouldn't walk away with unresolved feelings. He mirrored, I can see you're upset. Who wouldn't be is there anything we can do? No response. Finally, he primed. That is, he took his best guess at what they might be thinking and said it in a way that showed it was okay to talk about it. And then went on from there, he asked, Are you thinking that the only reason we're doing this is to make money, that maybe we don't care about your personal lives? After a brief pause someone answered, well, it sure looks like that. Do you have any idea how much trouble this is going to cause? Then someone else chimed in, and the discussion was off and running. Now this is not the kind of thing you would do unless nothing else has worked. You really want to hear from others, and you have a very strong idea of what they're probably thinking priming is an act of good faith, taking risks, becoming vulnerable and Building Safety in hopes that others will share their meaning. What if the other person is wrong? Sometimes it feels dangerous to sincerely explore the views of someone whose path is wildly different from your own he or she could be completely wrong, bigoted or dangerous, and we're acting calm and collected. We feel like mounting a crusade, not asking a question, to keep ourselves from feeling like sellouts while exploring others paths, no matter how different or wrong they seem, remember we're trying to understand their point of view, not necessarily agree with it or support it. Understanding doesn't equate with agreement. Sensitivity doesn't equate to acquiescence. By taking steps to understand another person's path to action, we aren't promising that we'll accept their point of view. We are promising to listen. There will be time later for us to share our path as well. For now, we're merely trying to get at what others think in order to understand why they're feeling the way they're feeling and doing what they're doing. How to respectfully disagree about politics, having a crucial conversation can seem impossible with hot button issues like politics. Co author Joseph gretti has some tips for how to explore others' paths, even when you disagree, to turn a raging argument into a civil conversation. Watch the video how to respectfully disagree about politics@crucialconversations.com at crucialconversations.com sanjas Team exploring the team's path. Let's put all the skills together in a single interaction by going back to Sanj and his team. The team has gathered for a morning huddle, Andrea is reporting on a critical milestone. Andrea, despite the work we did, we still haven't completed the final cycle test that will have to be done over the next week. I know this is later than expected, but I don't think anyone ever thought this was a realistic timeline to begin with. Sanj, wait what you signed up for this timeline. You agreed to it if you didn't. Think it was realistic. You should have said something. Andrea, it's on you and your team to deliver what you've agreed to. Andrea, we agreed to your timelines because there wasn't any other choice, not because they were reasonable. Sanjas, blood is starting to boil. He has always been a high performer, and he hates missing deadlines. If the team had been honest with him at the start, he could have flexed the schedule and maybe avoided this. He looks around the group, he can see the apprehension in their faces. It's clear this conversation isn't going well. Sanj is disappointed and irritated, Andrea is defensive and striking out. Sanj senses the crossroad he is at with the team right now. What happens next may well determine how they work together from here on and the ultimate success of the project. He takes a pause and thinks, what do I really want here? Easy. He wants the project to succeed. Berating Andrea is not going to make that happen. Sanj knows he needs the team's help. The team members can see the land mines ahead that he's missing. He needs them to speak up with their concerns before it's too late. Sanj, contrast, to build safety. I don't want anyone to feel pressured to agree to a timeline he or she knows isn't realistic that spells disaster for all of us. I want you all to feel like you can be open and candid about the risks ahead without worrying that it will reflect poorly on you or the team. It won't. I don't want any deadline that we can't all win with. Tony that's easy for you to say you're the star from corporate, your job's not on the line. Sanj, ask, can we talk about that for a minute? I've overheard several of you make comments about me being from corporate. I get the sense that you don't trust that I'm on your side. Silence. Andrea, sounding nervous. Oh, of course not. Why wouldn't we trust you? I mean, you want this project to succeed, right? Sonj, mirror the way you say that and how quiet everyone else is being makes me wonder if you do trust me. In my experience, projects like this succeed when the whole team knows everyone has the same goal, only then will we all feel safe being honest and candid about our concerns. Asked, I'd really like to know if there's something about me or the way I'm managing that's making that hard more silence. Peter, I think you're doing a great job, sonj, we're happy you're here. Andrea agreed, it isn't you. We're all just feeling a lot of pressure right now. I don't even want to think about what happens to all our jobs if this project tanks. Sanj paraphrases, Oh, it sounds like maybe you think your jobs are at risk. Is that it? Andrea, yes. I mean, after what happened to our last project manager, shouldn't we be thinking that way? Sanj prime, I can appreciate that concern, and yes, ultimately, all our jobs are tied to our performance. But I'm wondering if there's something more going on here. Let me take a stab at something. I've heard a half a dozen references to me as Singapore Sanj. People laugh when they say it, but now I wonder if there's some real concern that I only care about moving up in Singapore headquarters and not making this project a real success. Are you worried that, because I was put on this project by corporate, that I'm here evaluating you or something? Team members glance nervously at one another. Andrea, well, Sanj, because if that is a concern, I want to address it right now. We all have a lot at stake with this project, and from here, the conversation goes to the real issues. The team discusses what's really going on, and both sides leave feeling more confident that they can speak up about concerns. What if you disagree? Remember your ABCs. Let's say you did your level best to make it safe for the other person to talk. After asking, mirroring, paraphrasing and eventually priming, the other person opened up and shared his or her path. It's now your turn to talk. But what if you disagree? Some of the other person's facts are wrong and his or her stories are completely fouled up. Well, at least they're a lot different from the story you've been telling now. What agree as you watch families and work groups take part in heated debates, it's common to notice a rather intriguing. Phenomenon, although the various parties you're observing are violently arguing, in truth, they're in violent agreement. They actually agree on every important point, but they're still fighting. They've found a way to turn subtle differences into a raging debate. For example, last night, your teenage son broke his curfew again, you and your spouse have spent the morning arguing about the infraction the last time James came in late, you agreed to ground him. But today you're upset because it seems like your spouse is backpedaling by suggesting that James still be able to attend a football camp this week. Turns out, it was just a misunderstanding. You and your spouse agree to the grounding. The central issue you thought your spouse was reneging on the agreement, when, in truth, you just hadn't actually resolved the date the grounding would start. You had to step back and listen to what you were both saying to realize that you weren't actually disagreeing but violently agreeing. Most arguments consist of battles over the five to 10% of the facts and stories that people disagree over. And while it's true that people eventually need to work through differences, you shouldn't start there start with an area of agreement. So here's the takeaway, if you completely agree with the other person's path, say so and move on. Agree when you agree. Don't turn an agreement into an argument. Build, of course, the reason most of us turn agreements into debates is because we disagree with a certain portion of what the other person has said. Never mind that it's a minor portion. If it's a point of disagreement, we jump all over it, like the last piece of chocolate pie at the dessert buffet. We do this because we're trained to look for minor errors from an early age. For instance, we learn in kindergarten that if you have the right answer, you're the teacher's pet. Being right is good. Of course, if others have the right answer, they get to be the pet. So being right first is even better. You learn to look for even the tiniest of errors in others, facts, thinking or logic, then you point out the errors. Being right at the expense of others is best. By the time you finish your education, you have a virtual PhD in cashing trivial differences and turning them into a major deal. So when another person offers up a suggestion based on facts and stories, you're looking to disagree, and when you do find a minor difference, you turn this snack into a meal. Instead of remaining in healthy dialog, you end up in violent agreement. On the other hand, when you watch people who are skilled in dialog, it becomes clear that they're not playing this everyday game of Trivial Pursuit, looking for trivial differences and then proclaiming them aloud. In fact, they're looking for points of agreement. As a result, they'll often start with the words I agree, then they talk about the part they agree with, at least that's where they start. Now, when the other person has merely left out an element of the argument, skilled people will agree and then build, rather than saying wrong, you forgot to mention they say absolutely. In addition, I noticed that if you agree with what has been said, but the information is incomplete, build, point out areas of agreement and then add elements that were left out of the discussion. Compare. Finally, if you do disagree, compare your path with the other person's. That is rather than suggesting that the other person is wrong, suggest that you differ. He or she may, in fact, be wrong, but you don't know for sure until you hear both sides of the story. For now, you just know that the two of you differ. So instead of pronouncing wrong, start with a tentative but candid opening. For example, I see things differently. Let me describe how I come at this from a different perspective. My data stream is different than yours. Can I share it? Then share your path using the state skills from chapter eight that is, begin by sharing your observations, share them tentatively, and invite others to test your ideas after you've shared your path, invite the other person to help you compare it with his or her experience, work together to explore and explain the differences. In summary, to help remember these skills, think of your ABCs agree, when you agree, build when others leave out key pieces. Compare when you. Differ. Don't turn differences into debates that lead to unhealthy relationships and bad results. Set expectations up front when exploring, when exploring others. Paths. You are trying to create safety for people to share their meaning, but the pool expands only when their meaning is heard, and when your meaning is heard, your meaning needs to be in the pool as well. However, you will create more safety for others by helping them share their meaning first, before you dive into the pool with all your meaning, start by listening, then sharing. This can be hard, especially when we are concerned that others may want to share their meaning, but don't want to hear ours. Uncle Carl is happy to spout off about his political views at the Thanksgiving dinner table, but the second someone voices a different opinion, he either rants or shuts down. How do you make sure you get a chance to be heard as well? You can't force people to listen to you. Just because you listen to them doesn't necessarily mean they will listen to you. Still, most people will feel a sense of obligation to reciprocate. If you have sincerely listened and explored their path first, most people will be willing to listen in return. It can also help to set that expectation upfront. For example, when Uncle Carl launches into his latest diatribe, take a moment to set some boundaries for the conversation. Let him know that you want to hear his perspective, and ask him if he is willing to hear yours in return. For example, Uncle Carl, I can tell that you're really passionate about this, and I would sincerely like to explore and understand your point of view. I'm pretty sure it's different than mine, and it would be great to learn more about what you think I'm committing to listening with an open mind. I wonder if, once I've done that, you'd be willing to listen to my point of view with an open mind. How about it? If Carl says no, then you can walk away from the conversation and feel okay about it. Nothing requires you to listen to his monologs, but chances are he'll agree to this reasonable request once he does and it's your turn to share your perspective. Don't be surprised if he needs a gentle reminder or five of them of the commitment he made to listen my Crucial Conversation. Darrell Kay, a few weeks ago, a friend I highly respect, told me about Crucial Conversations. The notion of Crucial Conversations resonated with me because I'm in the midst of some challenging leadership issues, all of which involved potentially difficult conversations leading to important decisions. Anyway, the idea intrigued me enough that I went straight to the bookstore and bought the book. Once I began reading it, I couldn't put it down. I read it like a novel over that evening and the next morning, as every page seemed to offer help for the sticky situation I found myself in. You see, I've been in the end stages of a major negotiation with a key partner. We want to jointly spin out a venture capital funded company in Europe to further develop our technology. As we got closer to a deal, over the last two months, the discussion started to decay, including heated phone calls and distrust on both sides. I was at a loss for how to effectively talk with the folks on the other side. Two weeks ago, we received a deal term sheet, so we had to either come together on an agreement or go our separate ways. If we went our separate ways, both sides knew it would end badly. So in desperation, last week, I met with my negotiating counterparts to try to work through the impasses and strike a deal. In preparing for the meeting, I re read the book, and it was like a light turning on for me. I went into the negotiations armed with a new communication approach. I literally scripted my arguments and had crib sheets on the dialog process. I followed the basic process from the book, and it worked like a charm. There were many points where the dialog started to decay, but each time, I was able to restore it and move the discussion forward. One of the big things I had to do was fight my impulse to argue for my view and instead restore safety by simply exploring the other side's perspective. After a six hour meeting, we emerged with the outline of a very good deal for both parties. The deal was finalized over the last two days, negotiating the details of the final documents under tight time pressures over the phone and on two different continents was challenging and full of land mines. In fact, just yesterday, at the moment of extreme tension, it seemed that the entire deal was coming unwound. I had to work the phones for four hours to rebuild dialog between the parties so that we could get through the final pieces of the contract. Last night, we were down to one. Word in the 17 page agreement, I wouldn't give in and our partners, people tried to bully me. I had to step back again, explore their views and rebuild safety by finding a mutual purpose. We resolved the final piece very easily on a phone call at 5am in which I used the communication process to find common understanding between the parties, I truly don't think that we would have struck the deal if a good friend had not recommended this powerful approach to communication. Summary, explore others paths to encourage the free flow of meaning and help others leave silence or violence behind. Explore their path to action. Start with an attitude of curiosity and patience. This helps restore safety. Then use four powerful listening skills to retrace the other person's path to action to its origins. Ask. Start by simply expressing interest in the other person's views. Mirror. Increase safety by respectfully acknowledging the emotions people appear to be feeling. Paraphrase as others begin to share part of their story, restate what you've heard to show not just that you understand, but also that it's safe for others to share what they're thinking prime if others continue to hold back prime, take your best guess at what they may be thinking and feeling as you begin to respond, remember, Agree, agree when you share views. Build, if others leave something out, agree, where you share views, then build compare when you do differ significantly. Don't suggest others are wrong. Compare your two views. 

