Chapter 10, retake your pen. How to be resilient when hearing tough feedback. No one can hurt me without my permission. Gandhi, one of the authors, once gave a lengthy wedding toast to a happy couple every time he referred to the bride, he erroneously used the name of the groom's ex wife. He was feeling flush with confidence in his artful delivery, until after his fourth use of the wrong name, at that point, a cringing guest couldn't take it anymore and yelled out, it's Bonnie, not Becky. Oops. Critical feedback can be hard to hear. Some of the most crucial conversations of all are when others tell you unpleasant things about yourself. But there's a difference between getting feedback and being feed smacked. Most of us have been feed smacked at some point in our life, in the middle of a meeting, an innocent walk down the hallway or a performance review, someone delivers a verbal wallop that rocks your psychological footing. And for some of us, life is never the same. Take Carmen, for example. Carmen worked in a family business. One day, she asked her uncle, one of the founders, for some feedback. He took off his glasses, locked his eyes on hers and said, You should be more like your sister. Linda Carmen recalls I was dumbfounded. Linda is petite, flirty, Coy and flattering to men. I am quite tall, independent, resourceful and straightforward and work with men as equals. Then she adds, even though this happened decades ago, it still sticks in my mind. We study the stories of a few 100 people who had been feed smacked at some point in their lives. Most told us of scars they carry to this day from these momentary encounters. When you listen to what they heard, it's easy to conclude that damage was unavoidable. Some were feed smacked at work with statements like you're an evil person, you're a thief, you are scum. Quit being such a doormat for everyone who walks into your office and please think about leaving. I need warriors, not wimps. You are lazy and entitled. You're venomous and poisonous. You're kind of whiny, you're lazy, I guess you just have no ambition or drive others reeled after an encounter at home, you're so desperate for someone to love that you're settling for your boyfriend, for someone who is supposed to be a good communicator at work, you sure don't communicate well with me. Who would hire you? You only want to have kids so you can have friends. You're a worthless piece of blank and don't care about anyone but yourself. We were struck by how many could remember word for word, what was said as though it were embroidered onto a mental sampler. Sticks and stones may break bones, but these few words shattered self confidence, hope and in some cases, life plans. So what are we to do? Is it inevitable that our well being can be demolished at any moment if the right person says the wrong thing? Feedback, lessons from felons. We've spent much of our careers telling the world that the best way to help people receive and act on negative feedback is to improve how we deliver the message. In the previous chapters of this book, we've given you tools you can use to help others feel safe, make it safe as you say, the right things, CPR in the right way, state, my path for the right reasons. Start with heart, and we stand by those ideas, but we grossly underestimated how communication could be improved by improving people's ability to hear hard things, no matter how those messages are delivered. That is until we met 100 felons in downtown Salt Lake City, Utah in the United States, on the corner of 700 east and 100 South in Salt Lake City sits a three story red brick Victorian mansion built in 1892 when it was completed, it boasted the city's first indoor plumbing. But today, something far more innovative happens in it. It is now home to the other side Academy, or Tosa. The inhabitants are 120 men and women who have been arrested an average of 25 times each. In most cases, they've been running and gunning in crime, addiction and homelessness for years or even decades. A woman we'll call Gloria, for example, lived under a bridge with her mother from the time she was five when her mother introduced her to meth at age 10, she thought she found a superpower when she applied to the other side Academy, she was facing charges for a brutal attack on her boyfriend. Another student named Jeffrey, spent six years on the streets letting people do unspeakable things to him in order to stay high. A man will call Dominic embraced a promising. Start to a gang career by stabbing a homeless man. Students at the other side Academy have a lot of problems. Most of the students stay for two to four years as an alternative to a new prison or jail sentence. During that time, they work hard to overcome a lifetime of self destruction. There are no professionals at the other side Academy, no therapists, counselors, guards, nothing but a family of peers who have to find a way to be self reliant. No one pays to come to the academy. The academy receives no tuition, insurance reimbursement or funding from the government. Instead, the students run world class businesses in order to generate income and to help them learn new habits of living and working with others. When students arrive at the other side Academy, they often behave in ways that are impulsive, selfish, brooding, racist, lazy, defensive and dishonest. Jail and prison aren't great prep schools for professional decorum, and no one got arrested for singing too loud in the church choir. If you've ever complained about the problem people in your workplace, imagine what it would be like to try to run a business staffed entirely by students from the other side Academy. And yet, for every year since their founding in 2015 businesses of the other side Academy have been the top rated in their class. The other side Movers is the number one rated moving company in the state. Listen to a typical review from one of the other side movers customers Berkeley. R says, when I read all the amazing reviews of the other side movers, I thought, how on earth could a moving company have so many great reviews. Well, it's because they're awesome. They charge an hourly rate and are super fast, like running up and down the stairs fast. Not only are you getting a great price, you're getting super respectful, professional, conscientious guys who care about your stuff. My foreman, Lafe, went out of his way to show me the teeniest, tiniest ding on our door frame that I would have never noticed in a million years. But he felt compelled to show me, because that's the kind of care they put into their work. 10 million stars hire them if you get a chance. That's just one of hundreds of typical five star reviews of one of the social enterprises the other side, builders has an impeccable reputation for integrity and quality, and if you read online reviews of the other side, thrift boutique, you'd think people were describing a stay at a Four Seasons Resort. How does this happen? How can deeply broken people come to work harmoniously together to accomplish results that would be the envy of the finest companies on the planet, the answer games every Tuesday and Friday night, from seven to 9pm students gather for what the other side Academy calls games. Academy leaders use the term to remind students that while like a sports game, Academy games can be intense and challenging. There are rules to keep them safe. They don't last forever, and you can move on when they're over. In games, people sit in groups of 20 and give each other unvarnished feedback. The fundamental belief is that relentless exposure to truth is the best path to empathy, growth and happiness. Games can be loud. Vocabulary is sometimes raw. A single student can be the focus of a score of colleagues for 15 to 20 minutes without let up peers present you with evidence that you have acted dishonestly, manipulatively, lazily, selfishly or arrogantly. There is little emphasis placed on diplomatic delivery of the message instead peers focus on helping individuals learn to quote, take their game. Taking your game means, in essence, learning to listen, non defensively. Older students advise you to just listen, then put it all in a bag and take it to your pillow tonight, there you can decide what is gold and what is crap. Now, please understand we are not telling you about games to excuse you from your responsibility to deliver messages in respectful ways. Everything you've learned in this book calls for the opposite the other side. Academy has its own logic for why this unique population in this unique setting might benefit from this unique approach, but whether you agree or disagree with the reasoning, there is something striking we can learn from what happens to those who learn to not just participate but thrive in this kind of forum. Unsurprisingly, newer students don't take their games very well. They withdraw, deny or lash out against those who are telling them things they don't want to hear. But that changes quickly. They soon learn to let others say whatever they want to say, however they want to say it. They discover that they are the only sure source of their own sense of safety and worth. That discovery is liberating. They stop blaming the world for how they feel and. Become responsible for their own serenity. Metaphorically speaking, they learn to retake their pen. Think of your pen as the power to define your worth. When you hold your pen, you get to author the terms, is your worth intrinsic to you? Is it about how you look? Is it contingent on how much you achieve, how many people admire you, or whether a certain person returns your love, you're born with your pen firmly in your own grasp. Babies don't fret over others' opinions. We have no need for reassurance of something that seems beyond question. It doesn't matter to us that grandma wishes we looked more like her, that uncle would have liked us better if we had brown eyes or that our older sister wanted us to be a girl. But that changes as we grow, as we become more aware of the emotions and judgments of those around us, a line gets crossed. We no longer look to others simply for help, information or companionship, things they are qualified to offer us. Instead, without realizing it, we hand them our pen. Whoever holds your pen can compose the terms of your well being. Some days you're in full possession of your pen. Some people like you, some people don't. Some things go well, some go poorly. But your personal security doesn't come from others' opinions of you. It comes from an innate sense of your enduring worth. Your psychological stock doesn't rise and fall based on whether someone laughs at your joke. You've got your pen. But then one day, a subtle shift happens without your awareness. You give a presentation that totally rocks. People nod when they should nod. They scribble notes at your every key insight, and at the end, a peer you've never spoken to tells you it was the best project pitch he's ever seen. It feels good, really good. The committee meets and approves your proposal. That feels even better. Then your boss pulls you aside and says, I've got big plans for you. Let's talk tomorrow. You look down and see your pen is now missing. You know it's circulating out there somewhere. But who cares? Life feels good. A shift happens when we no longer look to others just for information. We begin to look to them for definition. We don't simply enjoy others' approval. We need it. From that moment, we are fundamentally insecure. Those in possession of our pen now control our emotional well. Being as good as today feels tomorrow is now pregnant with peril. To paraphrase the pastor, Cornelius Lindsay, if you live by the compliment, you'll die by the criticism. Sometimes we surrender our pens thoughtlessly. We don't notice the moment our center of gravity shifts. We lean too far forward and move from enjoying praise to needing it. Sometimes we do it out of a naive hope that outside evidence will take better care of us than we can of ourselves. And other times, it's just about a quick fix we're unwilling to do the work required to steady ourselves, preferring to lean on approval instead. Then a crucial conversation or two remind us that this way of living makes us fundamentally unstable. How you experience feedback has more to do with the location of your pen than the content of the message. The feedback puzzle. After watching students at the other side Academy become masters of receiving feedback, we began to understand a puzzle in our own data. To help you appreciate what baffled us, listen to this list of some tough feedback messages people reported getting next rank. Order them based on which you would guess was least to most hurtful to hear as reported by the subjects. Number one, you are venomous and poisonous. Number two, you start conversations in the middle. You don't ask people if they have time. You just engage when it's convenient for you. Number three, you're an evil person. You're a thief. You are scum. Number four, when you lose your temper, it can make others feel less respected. And number five, you need to take a deep look at yourself and find and eliminate your shortcomings. We've asked hundreds of people to perform this task. The most common sorting is number one, you start conversations in the middle. You don't ask people if they have time. Number two, when you lose your temper, it can make others feel less respected. Number three, you need to take a deep look at yourself and find and eliminate your shortcomings. Number four, you are venomous and poisonous, and no surprise. Number five, you are an evil person. You are a thief. You are scum. Notice that when you sort it this way, you make a tacit assumption the sorting is based on the magnitude of the message. We assume that minor criticisms of easily changed behaviors would hurt much less than major judgments about deep character flaws. We have no doubt that being called Evil scum would be deeply scarring while being told you start conversations in the middle or. Would feel like a paper cut. It is this belief that distracts us from the work it takes to sever others judgments from our worth. Here is the actual ranking based on reports of our subjects, of a, how much the message hurt and B, how long the hurt lasted for them, all of them were equally painful. They were all equally subjectively hurtful. Neither content nor delivery predicted the magnitude of the harm. Clearly, something else was at play. Back to the other side, Academy. Our time at the Academy helped us see, once again, that how you feel about feedback is about who holds the pen, not what or how things are said. The very fact that we think the content or design of the feedback determines how we'll feel is our problem. It's Friday night. The game is on Marlin, a 55 year old former junkie and prison alum who looks like a weathered Seafarer when at rest, his face defaults to grumpy. He's been at the Academy for three years. When he arrived, he was emotionally brittle. The slightest criticism or suggestion of disapproval sent him into an angry tirade. He was gamed relentlessly for being rude, self absorbed and defensive. But that was then. He is now a foreman with the other side builders. One of the newer students working under him brings him a full throated game. You're a control freak, Marlin. I'm not an idiot. I have construction experience. I know how to do things, but it doesn't matter if my way would work. It has to be your way. Do you get some kind of thrill out of keeping all of us under your thumb. Why can't you let me do it my way? Sometimes, Marlon takes it all in. He sits comfortably with his arms and legs relaxed. He looks calmly at the younger student as he pours out his complaint. As the student continues, Marlins face becomes sad when his colleague finishes, Marlin looks down, takes a breath and says, I didn't think about how this felt to you. You're right. That is what I do. I'll fix it. Three years ago, Marlin feared truth and craved approval. Today, he craves truth and fears approval. He has learned to keep approval at a healthy distance to treat it as information, not affirmation. How did that happen? Two parts of the pen he learned to retake his pen. Let's elaborate a bit on the idea of the pen feedback only hurts when we believe it threatens one or both of our most fundamental psychological needs, safety, perceived physical, social or material security and worth a sense of self respect, self regard or self confidence. Let's broaden the definition of the pen as the power to define what we need to secure both of these needs. First, let's focus on the issue of safety. Many students at the other side Academy grew up in conditions of perpetual insecurity. As a result, they carry a belief that their security is perpetually at risk, and, more importantly, that they are incapable of securing it. While your upbringing may have been different from theirs, many of us have had experiences growing up that make us wary in some circumstances. As a result, we come into some conversations feeling an unnecessary amount of apprehension. As we grow to adulthood and gain greater resources to care for ourselves, we fail to update our assumptions about our safety, and those assumptions control our lives. When our boss, our life partner, our neighbor or a passenger on a subway starts to criticize us, we react emotionally far out of proportion to the real risk. Why? Because we've equated approval with safety and disapproval with danger, and we fail to update the equation. As our capacity to take responsibility for our safety has increased when we become adults, the pen is ours. We are responsible for and capable of caring for ourselves. Admittedly, there are times when feedback does include financial threats, I'm going to fire you, relational threats, I'm going to leave you, or even physical threats, I'm going to hit you. In these instances, some level of fear is the right response, but our analysis of the 445 episodes people reported in our study showed that immediate threats are a rare exception. In most cases, it is our defensive, combative or resentful response to feedback that puts us at risk more than the feedback itself. And one reason we become so defensive is that we underestimate our capacity to protect ourselves. You don't get angry when you're confident. You get angry when you're scared. Now let's talk about worth let's start with two assumptions. First, that learning truth is an absolute good. The more truth you know, the better you. And navigate life. Second that others feedback is either pure truth, pure falsehood, or some mixture of the two. Usually it's some mixture. The sensible response to feedback would be to do what students of the other side Academy do, put it in a bag, sort out what's true and discard the rest. But we don't. Instead, whether it's true, false or a combination, we react to it indiscriminately with hurt, shame, fear or anger. Why? Because we live with an undercurrent of worry that we aren't worthy. It is our fear that we're inadequate, unlovable or worthless that makes the opinions of others so threatening. When others hold our pens, we live with a constant gnawing fear of their disapproval. Their feedback is no longer an indictment of our behavior, it is an audit of our worth. When we surrender our pen, we simultaneously abdicate responsibility for defining the terms of our own worthiness. We stop generating feelings of worth and start looking for them, and that search perpetuates our feelings of insecurity. Do we really live in a world so brittle that a single verbal stone can bring it crashing down, not until we lose control of our pen, the feedback cure students of the other side Academy become masters at receiving feedback. It's not uncommon to hear older students complain that quote, It's been too long since I've gotten a hard game. I don't want others to stop helping me grow. Four tools help them progress from feeling defined by feedback to being beneficiaries of it. These tools redirect them inside, rather than outside, to secure their safety and worth the tools form the acronym cure. First Collect yourself, breathing deeply and slowly reminds you that you are safe. It signals that you don't need to be preparing for physical defense. Being mindful of your feelings helps too. Do your best to name them as you feel them. Naming them helps you put a little bit of daylight between you and the emotions are you hurt, scared, embarrassed, ashamed, if you can think about what you're feeling, you gain more power over the feeling. Also identifying, examining and critiquing the stories that led to your feelings can help. As we discussed in chapter five, some students collect themselves by consciously connecting with soothing truths. For example, by repeating an affirmation like this, can't hurt me. I'm safe. Or if I made a mistake, it doesn't mean I am a mistake. Marlon retook his pen and authored the terms of his own worth as well. Quote, I have infinite intrinsic and eternal worth. Neither my past nor others opinions define me. My worth is about my potential and my choices. Connecting with these ideas during games anchors him some with beliefs in a higher power. Find prayer helpful in connecting with reassurance of their worth as well. Second, understand be curious. Ask questions and ask for examples and then just listen, as we learned in the previous chapter, Curiosity can inoculate you against defensiveness, focusing on understanding helps interrupt our tendency toward personalizing. It's hard to beat yourself up when you're busy solving a puzzle. The best curiosity puzzle is answering the question, why would a reasonable, rational, decent person say what he or she is saying? Detach yourself from what is being said as though it's being said about a third person that will help you bypass the need to evaluate what you're hearing. Simply act like a good reporter trying to understand the story. Third recover. It's sometimes best at this point to ask for a time out feelings of control, bring feelings of safety, and you regain a sense of control when you exercise your right to respond when you're truly ready. Explain that you want some time to reflect, and you'll respond when you have a chance to do so like students at the other side Academy, separate the tasks of collecting and sorting, put it all in a bag and sort it out later. Give yourself permission to feel and recover from the experience before doing any evaluation of what you heard at the Academy, students sometimes simply say, I will take a look at that. They don't agree, they don't disagree. They simply promise to look sincerely at what they were told on their own timeline. They put it in the pool of meaning and let it marinate until they are in full possession of their pens. You can end a challenging episode by simply saying, it's important to me that I get this right. I need some time, and I'll get back to you to let you know where I come out, then use whatever practices work for you to reconnect with a sense of safety and worth five. Fourth, engage. Examine what you were told. If you've done a good job. Re establishing feelings of safety and worth. You'll look for truth rather than defensively poking holes in the feedback. Sift through the bag or pool of meaning, even if it's 95% junk and 5% gold, look for the gold. There is almost always at least a kernel of truth in what people are telling. You scour the message until you find it, then, if appropriate, re engage with the person who shared the feedback and acknowledge what you heard, what you accept and what you commit to do. At times, this may mean sharing your view of things, if you're doing so with no covert need for approval, you won't need to be defensive or combative. Today, Marlin carries himself with an easy confidence. He is reunited with parents and siblings with whom he had been at war for 30 years. Over three years, he participated in 300 games. That is a lot of feedback, but what Marlin came to learn is that how he responded to the feedback was more important than the feedback itself. He came to see games he took badly as a reminder that he had inner work to do. As he learned to be the steward of his own safety and worth, he cultivated a peace that has changed everything. It turns out that the misery we feel when feed smacked is a symptom of a much deeper problem. Those who acknowledge and address this deeper issue don't just get better at these crucial conversations, they become better equipped for all of life's vicissitudes. Summary, retake your pen when you find yourself reacting to hard feedback, remind yourself that your reaction is largely within your control. Retake your pen by taking steps to secure your safety and affirm your worth. Then use four skills to manage how you address the information others share. First, collect yourself, breathe deeply, name your emotions and present yourself with soothing truths that establish your safety and worth. Second, understand, be curious, ask questions and ask for examples, and then just listen. Detach yourself from what is being said as though it is being said about a third person. Third, recover. Take a time out if needed to recover emotionally and process what you've heard. Fourth, engage, examine what you were told, look for the truth, rather than defensively poking holes in the feedback, if appropriate, re engage with the person who shared the feedback and acknowledge what you heard, what you accept and what you commit to do if needed, share your feelings of things in a non combative way. 

