11 move to action. How to Turn crucial conversations into action and results to do nothing is in every man's power. Samuel Johnson, up until this point, we've suggested that getting more meaning into the pool helps with dialog. In order to encourage this free flow of meaning. We've shared the skills we've learned by watching people who are gifted at dialog by now, if you've followed some or all of this advice, you're walking around with full pools. People who walk near you should hear the sloshing. It's time we add two final skills, having more meaning in the pool, even jointly owning it doesn't guarantee that we all agree on what we're going to do with the meaning. We often fail to convert the ideas into action for two reasons. First, we have unclear expectations about how decisions will be made, and second, we do a poor job of acting on the decisions we do make. This can be dangerous. In fact, when people move from adding meaning to the pool to moving to action, it's a prime time for new challenges to arise. Dialog is not decision making. The two riskiest times in Crucial Conversations tend to be at the beginning and at the end. The beginning is risky, because you have to find a way to create safety or else things go awry. The end is dicey, because if you aren't careful about how you clarify the conclusions and decisions flowing from your pool of shared meaning, you can run into violated expectations later on. This can happen in two ways. How are decisions going to be made? First? People may not understand how decisions are going to be made. For example, Kara is miffed. Renee just forwarded a confirmation email to her for a three day cruise. The Email thanks him for the reservation and the $500 deposit he has paid to secure an upgrade to an outside suite. A week ago, they had a crucial conversation about vacation plans. Both expressed their views and preferences respectfully and candidly. It wasn't easy, but at the end, they decided a cruise suited both quite well and yet now Kara is upset. Renee is bewildered. He thought Kara would be ecstatic. Kara agreed in principle about a cruise. She didn't agree to this particular cruise. Renee thought that any cruise would be fine, and made a decision on his own. Have fun on that cruise, Renee. Are we ever going to decide the second problem with decision making occurs when no decision gets made. Crucial Conversations are tough. By the time we navigate successfully to the end of one we are often so incredibly relieved that we made it through that we simply and quickly end with a heartfelt expression of gratitude. Thanks. I'm really glad we could have this conversation. We walk away feeling better because, hey, no one cried and no one yelled. Chalk one up in the win column. But because we haven't clarified our understanding or solidified decisions, ideas slip away and dissipate, or people can't figure out what to do with them. Decide how to decide. We can solve both these problems if before making a decision, the people involved decide how to decide. Don't allow people to assume that dialog is decision making. Dialog is a process for getting all relevant meaning into a shared pool. That process, of course, involves everyone. However, allowing even encouraging people to share their meaning, doesn't mean they are then guaranteed to take part in making all the decisions to avoid violated expectations. Separate dialog from decision making, make it clear how decisions will be made, who will be involved and why. When the line of authority is clear, when you're in a position of authority, you decide which method of decision making you'll use. Managers and parents, for example, decide how to decide. It's part of their responsibility as leaders. For instance, VPS don't ask hourly employees to decide on pricing changes or product lines. That's the leader's job. Parents don't ask small children to pick their home security device or to set their own bedtime. That's the job of the parent. Of course, both leaders and parents turn more decisions over to their direct reports and children when they warrant the responsibility, but it's still the authority figure who decides what method of decision making to employ. Deciding what decisions to turn over and when to do it is part of their stewardship when the line of authority isn't. Clear when there is no clear line of authority, deciding how to decide can be quite difficult. For instance, consider a conversation you had with your daughter's school teacher. The teacher suggested that you should hold your child back. You're not sure, but whose choice is this anyway? Who decides whose choice it is. Does everyone have a say? Then a vote? Is it the school officials responsibility? So they choose, since parents have ultimate responsibility, should they consult with the appropriate experts and then decide, Is there even a clear answer to this tough question? A case like this is hand tooled for dialog, all the participants need to get their meaning into the pool, including their opinions about who should make the final choice. That's part of the meaning you need to discuss. If you don't openly talk about who decides and why, and your opinions vary wildly, you're likely to end up in a heated battle that can only be resolved in court handled poorly. That's exactly where these kinds of issues are resolved, the Jones family versus Happy Valley School District. So what's a person to do? Talk openly about your child's abilities and interests as well as about how the final choice will be made. Don't mention lawyers or a lawsuit in your opening comments, this only reduces safety and sets up an adversarial climate. Your goal is to have an open, honest and healthy discussion about a child not to exert your influence, make threats or somehow beat the educators, listen to the opinions of the experts at hand and discuss how and why the experts should be involved when decision making authority is unclear, use your best dialog skills to get meaning into the pool jointly decide how to decide. The four methods of decision making when you're deciding how to decide, it helps to have a way of talking about the decision making options available. There are four common ways of making decisions, command, consult, vote and consensus. These four options represent increasing degrees of involvement. Increased involvement brings the benefit of increased commitment, but also the curse of decreased decision making efficiency. So how do you decide who gets to decide? Savvy people choose whichever of these four methods of decision making best suits their particular circumstances command. Let's start with decisions that are made with no involvement whatsoever. This happens in one of three ways, either we make autonomous decisions within our area of responsibility, or outside forces place demands on us, demands that leave us no wiggle room, or we turn decisions over to others and then follow their lead. In reality, most decisions in life are command decisions we or others write the email, approve the purchase order, or design the presentation, the world would grind to a halt if involving others became a norm rather than an exception. When you're the boss, you make a host of command decisions out of pure efficiency, and that is as it should be, a key to being an effective leader is knowing which decisions are worth slowing down to allow for some level of involvement in the form of consulting, voting or consensus decision making. In the case of external forces, customers set prices, agencies mandate safety standards and other governing bodies simply hand us demands, as much as employees like to think their bosses are sitting around making choices. For the most part, they're simply passing on the demands of the circumstances. These are command decisions with external command decisions. It's not our job to decide what to do. It's our job to decide how to make it work. In the case of turning decisions over to others, we decide either that this is such a low stakes issue that we don't care enough to take part, or that we completely trust the ability of the delegate to make the right decision. More involvement adds nothing in strong teams and great relationships. Many decisions are made by turning the final choice over to someone we trust to make a good decision. We don't want to take the time ourselves and gladly turn the decision over to others. Consult. Consulting is a process whereby decision makers invite others to influence them before they make their choice. You can consult with experts a representative population, or even everyone who wants to offer an opinion, consulting can be an efficient way of gaining ideas and support without bogging down the decision making process, at least not too much. Wise leaders, parents and even couples, frequently make decisions in this way they gather. Their ideas, evaluate options, make a choice, and then inform the broader population. Vote. Voting is best suited to situations where efficiency is the highest value and you're selecting from a number of good options. Members of the team realize they may not get their first choice, but frankly, they don't want to waste time talking the issue to death, they may discuss options for a while and then call for a vote when facing several decent options. Voting is a great time saver, but should never be used when team members don't agree to support whatever decision is made. In these cases, consensus is required. Consensus this method can be both a great blessing and a frustrating curse. Consensus means you talk until everyone honestly agrees to one decision. This method can produce tremendous unity and high quality decisions if misapplied, it can also be a horrible waste of time. It should only be used with high stakes and complex issues, or issues where everyone absolutely must support the final choice, four important questions. When choosing among the four methods of decision making, consider the following questions. Number one, who cares determine who genuinely wants to be involved in the decision, along with those who will be affected, these are your candidates for involvement. Don't involve people who don't care. Number two, who knows, identify who has the expertise you need to make the best decision. Encourage these people to take part. Try not to involve people who contribute no new information. Number three, who must agree. Think of those whose cooperation you might need in the form of authority or influence in any decisions you might make. It's better to involve these people than to surprise them and then suffer their open resistance. Number four, how many people is it worth involving? Your goal should be to involve the fewest number of people while still considering the quality of the decision along with the support that people will give it. Ask, do we have enough people to make a good choice? Will others have to be involved to gain their commitment? Say it out loud, once you've considered your options and decided how you'll decide make sure you add this critical meaning to the pool. This may seem obvious, but we marvel at how often it's overlooked. For example, you have an important decision to make about key features for a new product you want to gather a lot of meaning from various experts. You send out a meeting invite to discuss new product features. The discussion is robust. You end the meeting with a pretty clear consensus among the gathered experts. Next, you review some market research, get feedback from the finance team and do some limited customer testing. You take all this information in and then make a decision. Your decision, this is a classic consult decision, and you feel great about it right up until you send the email to the initial group outlining the product features you decided on. Within minutes, your inbox is flooded with frustrated responses. The gist of these, why did you even bother to involve us if you were just going to do whatever you wanted anyway? What happened here? Well, you went into the initial meeting knowing this was going to be a consult decision. The group members came together, heard you, ask for their input, and assumed this would be a consensus decision. This is a pretty understandable and frankly common misconception, especially when you're dealing with consult versus consensus decisions. It's also easy to avoid once you've decided how you'll decide, make sure everyone knows it can be as simple as saying your input is critical here, and please be aware this is a consult decision. I'll take your input along with that of others, and make the decision. Or I'd like for this to be a consensus decision, but we need to make the decision today, and we only have an hour for this meeting, if we can come to consensus in that time frame. Great. If not, I'll take all your input and make the final decision. How about you? Here's a great exercise for teams or couples, particularly those that are frustrated about decision making, make a list of some important decisions being made in the team or relationship, then discuss how each decision is currently made and how each should be made, using the four important questions, after discussing each decision, decide how you'll make decisions in the future. A crucial conversation about your decision making practices can resolve many frustrating issues. Make assignments, put decisions into action. Does every Crucial Conversation need to end with a decision? Not necessarily. If our goal in a conversation is to get unstuck and improve our results, then yes, most often we will need to end with a decision. What is going to be different because of this conversation, but sometimes we fill the pool with so much new meaning that we may not be ready to move to a decision at the end of the conversation, and that's okay. While a conversation doesn't necessarily need to end with a decision, it should always end with a commitment. It may be a commitment to change or take action or it may be a commitment, simple but sincere, to reflect on the new meaning that has been shared. As you close your conversations with commitments, make sure you consider the following four elements, sometimes shortened to the acronym, www, F, who does what by when? How will you follow up? Who to quote an English proverb, everybody's business is nobody's business. If you don't make an actual assignment to an actual person, there's a good chance that nothing will ever come of all the work you've gone through to make a decision when it's time to pass out assignments. Remember, there is no we. We when it comes to assignments, actually means not me. It's code. Even when individuals are not trying to duck an assignment, the term we can lead them to believe that others are taking on the responsibility assign a name to every responsibility. This applies at home as well as at work. If you're divvying up household chores, be sure you've got a specific person to go with each chore. That is if you assign two or three people to take on a task, appoint one of them to be the responsible party, otherwise any sense of responsibility will be lost in a flurry of finger pointing later on, does what Be sure to spell out the exact deliverables you have in mind, the fuzzier the expectation, the higher the likelihood of disappointment. For example, the eccentric entrepreneur Howard Hughes once assigned a team of engineers to design and build the world's first steam powered car. When sharing his dream of a vehicle that could run on heated water, he gave them virtually no direction. After several years of intense labor, the engineers successfully produced the first prototype by running dozens of pipes through the car's body, thus solving the problem of where to put all the water required to run a steam powered car, the vehicle was essentially a giant radiator. When Hughes asked the engineers what would happen if the car got into a wreck, they nervously explained that the passengers would be boiled alive, much like lobsters in a pot. Hughes was so upset in what the crew came up with that he insisted they cut it up into pieces no larger than three inches. That was the end of the project. Learn from Hughes when you're first agreeing on an assignment, clarify up front the boundary conditions of what you want. For example, I want a steam powered car that is at least as safe, cost effective and feature rich as a petroleum powered car. Couples get into trouble in this area when one of the parties doesn't want to take time to think carefully about the deliverables, and then later on becomes upset because his or her unstated desires weren't met. Have you ever remodeled a room with a loved one? Then you know what we're talking about better. To spend the time up front clarifying exactly what you want, rather than waste resources and hurt feelings on the back end. To help clarify deliverables, use contrasting if you've seen people misunderstand an assignment in the past, explain the common mistake as an example of what you don't want, if possible, point to physical examples, rather than talk in the abstract, bring a prototype or sample. We learned this particular trick when hiring a set designer. The renowned designer talked in vague platitudes about what he would deliver, and it sounded great to us. I'll make you a modern, open office setting that can transform easily to a manufacturing look. He crooned while waving hands in suggestive gestures. 10s of 1000s of dollars later, he delivered something that looked more typical of Star Trek than Silicon Valley. We had to start over from scratch. From that day on, we learned to point to pictures and talk about what we want and don't want. Don't use furniture, colors, decorative items or materials that would be unfamiliar to Fortune 500 employees and do make it resemble the half dozen typical look. Books in these pictures, the clearer the picture of their deliverable, the less likely you'll be to be unpleasantly surprised by when it's shocking how often people leave this element out of an assignment, instead of giving a deadline, people simply point to the setting sun of some day with vague or unspoken deadlines, other urgencies come up, and the assignment finds a way to the bottom of the pile where it is soon forgotten. Assignments without deadlines are far better at producing guilt than stimulating action. Goals without deadlines aren't goals. They're merely directions. How will you follow up? Always agree on how often and by what method you'll follow up on the assignment. It could be a simple email confirming the completion of a project. It might be a full report in a team or family meeting. More often than not, it comes down to progress checks along the way. It's actually fairly easy to build follow up methods into the assignment. For example, call me on my cell phone when you finish your homework, then you can go play with friends, okay? Or perhaps you'll prefer to rely on milestones. Let me know when you've completed your library research, then we'll sit down and look at the next steps. Milestones, of course, must be linked to a drop dead date, let me know as soon as you completed the research component on this project you've got until the last week in November. But if you finish earlier, give me a call. Remember, if you want people to feel accountable, you must give them an opportunity to account, build an expectation for follow up into every assignment. Www, F WWF for when it's personal, ending a conversation by deciding who will do what by when and how you'll follow up seems fairly straightforward in a group setting or in our professional lives, many organizations have defined meeting structures specifically designed to capture action items and record decisions. But for many of you, our guess is that you've been thinking about and perhaps struggling with a one on one or personal Crucial Conversation. Maybe it's with a boss, a peer or a loved one. It's just as critical that you end those conversations with a plan for who will do what, by when and how you will follow up, otherwise, you stand a good chance of having the same conversation over and over again. But how do you do it without sounding ridiculously bureaucratic? Here are three tips for moving to action at the end of a personal Crucial Conversation. First, summarize for understanding. It's always a good idea to recap the conversation to make sure both people are on the same page. It can be helpful to share why you're summarizing. For example, great. This has been a really helpful conversation, and it feels like we're in a really good place. I want to recap what we've just talked about to make sure I have it all right. Second, make sure you have identified an action. What is going to change because of this conversation? Again, it can be helpful to share the why behind this. I'm so glad we've had this conversation. I feel like we're headed in a good direction, and I want to make sure I'm clear on what we each need to do differently going forward, in terms of my commitments all finally, you need to make a plan to follow up. No one's perfect, and there's a reasonably good chance that someone maybe you won't follow up perfectly on the commitments you've made. That's okay. That's being human, after all, but you want to have a plan in place to follow up so that you can catch things early and correct them sooner. Following up with a direct report or your child is one thing, but how do you follow up with your boss, a senior leader or a long tenured peer? It can be helpful to think of this as more of a plan to check in, rather than a plan to check up. For example, I think this is great. Thanks for taking the time to really dig into this. I'll circle back next week for a quick check, just to make sure that after we've had some time to sit with this, everything still seems okay and on track for both of us. Document your work. Once again, a proverb comes to mind. One dull pencil is worth six sharp minds. Don't leave your hard work to memory if you've gone to the effort to complete a crucial conversation, don't fritter away all the meaning you created by trusting your memories. Write down the details of conclusions, decisions decisions and assignments. Remember to record who does what by when, revisit your notes at key times, usually the next meeting and review assignments as you review what was supposed to be completed, hold people accountable when someone fails to deliver on a promise, it's time for dialog. Org discuss the issue by using the state skills we covered in chapter eight. When you hold people accountable, not only do you increase their motivation and ability to deliver on promises, but you create a culture of integrity. Summary, move to action, turn your successful crucial conversations into great decisions and united action by avoiding the two traps of violated expectations and inaction. Decide how to decide command. Decisions are made without involving others. Consult. Input is gathered from the group, and then a subset decides, vote an agreed upon percentage swings the decision consensus. Everyone comes to an agreement and then supports the final decision. Finish clearly, determine who does what by when, make the deliverables crystal clear, set a follow up time. Record the commitments and then follow up, finally hold people accountable to their promises. 

