Chapter 12, yeah, but advice for tough cases, good words are worth much and cost little. George Herbert, as we meet with Crucial Conversations trainers around the world, they report that at the end of a class, there is inevitably someone who raises a hand and says something in the form of Yeah, but, for example, yeah, but my boss would never respond like that, or Yeah, but my teenager could ignore a tsunami. Another common one is Yeah, but what if I'm not carrying my training manual with me when the crucial moment hits? In short, people can think of a dozen reasons why the skills we've been talking about don't apply to the challenges they face. In truth, the dialog skills we've shared apply to just about any problem you can imagine. However, since some situations are more difficult than others, we've chosen a few tough cases with which to illustrate the robustness of what you now know, we'll take a moment to share a thought or two on each sexual or other harassment. Yeah, but what if someone isn't blatantly harassing me or anything, but I don't like the way I'm being treated? How can I bring it up without making enemies? The danger point someone is making comments or gestures that you find offensive, the person does it seldom enough, and he or she is subtle enough that you're not sure if HR or your boss can even help. What can you do in these situations? It's easy to think that the offender has all the power. It seems as if the rules of polite society make it so that others can behave inappropriately, and you end up looking like you're overreacting if you bring it up. Generally speaking, a vast majority of these problems go away if they're privately, respectfully and firmly discussed. Your biggest challenge will be the respect part. If you put up with this behavior for too long, you'll be inclined to tell a more and more potent villain story about the offender. This will jack up your emotions to the point that you'll go in with guns blazing, even if only through your body language. The solution, tell the rest of the story, if you've tolerated the behavior for a long time before holding the conversation, own up to it. This may help you treat the individual like a reasonable, rational and decent person, even if some of his or her behavior doesn't fit this description, when you feel a measure of respect for the other person, you're ready to begin after establishing a mutual purpose for the exchange state your path, for example, establish mutual purpose. I'd like to talk about something that's getting in the way of my working with you. It's a tough issue to bring up, but I think it'll help us be better teammates. If I do is that okay? State my path. When I walk into your office, frequently, your eyes move from my eyes downward, and when I sit next to you at a computer, sometimes you put your arm around the back of my chair. I don't know that you're aware you're doing these things. So I thought I'd bring them up, because they send a message that makes me uncomfortable. How do you see it? If you can be respectful and private but firm in this conversation, most problem behavior will stop and remember, if the behavior is over the line and the person appears intentionally sexually aggressive, you should contact HR rather than attempt a private and dangerous conversation. Furthermore, if after a conversation like this, the behavior continues involve HR to ensure your rights and safety are protected an overly sensitive spouse, yeah, but what do you do when your spouse is too sensitive? You try to give your spouse some constructive feedback, but he or she reacts so strongly that you end up going to silence the danger point. Often couples come to an unspoken agreement during the first year or so of their marriage or relationship that affects how they communicate for the rest of the time. Say one person is touchy and can't take feedback, or the other doesn't give it very well. In any case, they in effect, agree to say nothing to each other. They live in silence. Problems have to be huge before they're discussed. The solution this is generally a problem of not knowing how to state your path when something bothers you, catch it early. Contrasting can also help. I'm not trying to blow this out of proportion. I just want to deal with it before it gets out of hand, share your facts, describe the specific behaviors you've observed. When Jimmy leaves his room a mess, you use sarcasm to get his attention, you call him a pig and then laugh as if you didn't mean it. Tentatively, explain the consequences. I don't think it's having the effect you want. He doesn't pick up on the hint, and I'm afraid he's starting to resent you your story. Then encourage testing. Do you see it differently? Finally, learn to look for signs that safety is at risk, and make it safe when you state things well and others become defensive, refuse to conclude that the issue is. Impossible to discuss. Think harder about your approach, step out of the content, do what it takes to make sure your partner feels safe, and then try again to candidly state your views. When couples stop giving each other helpful feedback, they lose out on the help of a lifelong confidant and coach. They miss out on hundreds of opportunities to help each other communicate more effectively. Failed trust? Yeah, but what if I just don't trust the person? He missed an important deadline? Now I wonder how I could ever trust him again? The danger point, people often assume that trust is something you have or don't have. Either you trust someone or you don't, that puts too much pressure on trust. What do you mean? I can't stay out past midnight. Don't you trust me? Your teenage son inquires. Trust doesn't have to be universally offered in truth, it's usually offered in degrees, and it's very topic specific. It also comes in two flavors, motive and ability. For example, you can trust me to administer CPR if needed. I'm motivated, but you can't trust me to do a good job. I know nothing about it. The solution deal with trust around the issue, not around the person. When it comes to regaining trust in others, don't set the bar too high. Just try to trust them in the moment, not across all issues. You don't have to trust them in everything to make it safe for yourself in the moment. Bring up your concerns tentatively. State what you see happening. I get the sense that you're only sharing the good side of your plan. I need to hear the possible risks before I'm comfortable. Is that okay? If they play games, call them on it. Also don't use your mistrust as a club to punish people if they've earned your mistrust in one area, don't let it bleed over into your overall perception of their character. If you tell yourself a villain story that exaggerates others untrustworthiness, you'll act in ways that help them justify themselves in being even less worthy of your trust, you'll start up a self defeating cycle and get more of what you don't want shows no initiative. Yeah, but what if it's not something they're doing, but something they don't do? Some members of my work team do what they're asked, but no more. If they run into a problem, they take one simple stab at fixing it, but if their efforts don't pay off, they quit the danger point, most people are far more likely to talk about the presence of a bad behavior than the absence of a good one. When someone really messes up, leaders and parents alike are compelled to take action. However, when people simply fail to be excellent, it's hard to know what to say the solution. Establish new and higher expectations. Don't deal with a specific instance. Deal with the overall pattern. If you want someone to show more initiative, tell him or her. Give specific examples of when the person ran into a barrier and then backed off after a single try. Raise the bar and then make it crystal clear what you've done jointly brainstorm what the person could have done to be both more persistent and more creative in coming up with a solution. For instance, I asked you to finish up a task that absolutely had to be completed before I returned from a trip. You ran into a problem, tried to get in touch with me, and then simply left a message with my four year old, what could you have done to track me down on the road? Or what would it have taken to create a backup strategy? Pay attention to ways you are compensating for someone's lack of initiative. Have you made yourself responsible for following up? If so, talk with that person about assuming the responsibility. Have you asked more than one person to take the same assignment so you can be sure it will get done if so, talk to the person originally assigned about reporting progress to you early. So you'll only need to put someone else on the job when there's a clear need for more resources. Stop acting out your expectations that others won't take initiative. Instead, talk your expectations out and come to agreements that place the responsibility on the team members, while giving you information early enough that you aren't left high and dry, touchy and personal. Yeah, but what if it's something hyper personal, like a hygiene problem, or maybe someone's boring and people avoid him or her? How could you ever talk about something personal and sensitive like that. The danger point most people avoid sensitive issues like the plague. Who can blame them? Unfortunately, when fear and misapplied compassion rule over honesty and courage, people can go for years without being given information that could be extremely helpful. When people do speak up, they often leap from silence to violence, jokes, nicknames and other veiled attempts to sneak in vague feedback are both indirect and disrespectful. Also, the longer you go without saying anything, the greater the pain when you finally deliver the message the solution use contrasting. Explain. That you don't want to hurt the person's feelings, but you do want to share something that could be helpful. Establish mutual purpose, let the other person know your intentions are honorable. Also explain that you're reluctant to bring up the issue because of its personal nature, but since the problem is interfering with the person's effectiveness, you really must tentatively describe the problem, don't play it up or pile it on, describe the specific behaviors and then move to solutions. Although these discussions are never easy, they certainly don't have to be offensive or insulting. There's more where that came from. Crucial conversations aren't just the big, anticipated, sometimes dreaded conversations you carefully plan for and then hold with precision and grace. Most often, you stumble into them without warning at any moment and with nearly everyone as you continue to practice your skills, you'll find you'll be better on your toes and more adept at navigating even the trickiest of situations. But we don't plan to abandon you here. Rather, we have curated a vast library of these kinds of Yeah, but scenarios, situations when people find it challenging to use their skills. For example, how do you surface microaggressions or racism? How do you respond to false accusations? How do you tell the truth when it comes across as harsh, even brutal. How do you confront a liar. How do you speak truth to someone in power? How do you talk to someone you don't even respect? How do you speak up for your morals and values? Over the years, we've offered tips, advice and even scripts for just how to hold these crucial conversations in our weekly newsletter and blog, crucial skills. We welcome you to read along each week as we answer readers real life questions, and of course, we welcome your own. You can also search our database of over 1000 previous responses to give you targeted advice when you need it most, to find additional advice for these and other very crucial conversations, visit us at crucial learning.com/blog 

