In chapter eight, state, my path how to speak persuasively, not abrasively, outspoken, by whom? Dorothy Parker when told she was very outspoken. So far, we've gone to great pains to prepare ourselves to step up to and master Crucial Conversations. Here's what we've learned. Our hearts need to be in the right place and our heads need to be focused on the right topic. We need to let go of the clever stories that are keeping us stuck. We need to learn to look closely at how people are engaging in the dialog, particularly when people are feeling unsafe, so that we can restore safety when necessary. So let's say that we are well prepared. We're ready to open our mouths and start sharing our point of view. That's right, we're actually going to express our opinion. Now, what most of the time we walk into a discussion and slide into autopilot. Hi, how are the kids? What's going on at work? What could be easier than talking. We know 1000s of words and generally weave them into sentences that suit our needs most of the time. However, when both the stakes and our emotions rise, well, that's when we open our mouths and don't do so well. In fact, as we suggested earlier, the more important the discussion, the less likely we are to be on our best behavior. Sadly, as we'll see, we express our views in a way that is perfectly designed to provoke defensiveness to help us improve our advocacy skills. We'll examine five skills that solve our two main problems, defensiveness and resistance. First, we'll look at how the five skills help you design your message in a way that helps others to hear it. And second, we'll explore how these same skills help you be more persuasive at times when your own certainty is your worst enemy, sharing risky meaning, adding information to the pool of meaning can be quite difficult when the ideas we're about to pour into the collective consciousness contain delicate, unattractive or controversial opinions, as in Marta, people simply don't like working with you. I'm cutting you from the Special Projects team. It's one thing to argue that your company needs to shift from green to red packaging. It's quite another to tell a person that he or she is offensive or unlikable when the topic turns from things to people, it's always more difficult. To nobody's surprise, some people are better at approaching these conversations than others when it comes to sharing touchy information, the worst alternate between bluntly dumping their ideas into the pool of meaning and saying nothing at all. Either they start with, you're not going to like this, but hey, somebody has to be honest, a classic fool's choice, or they simply stay quiet. Those who are good at dialog say some of what's on their minds, but they understate their views out of fear of hurting others. They talk all right, but they carefully sugar coat their message, for example, rather than being honest that they think your marketing piece will be an embarrassment to the company, they say, Ah, well, I like the graphics a lot, but I think we can spice up the text a little here and there. The best at dialog speak their minds completely and do it in a way that makes it safe for others to hear what they have to say and respond to it as well. They are both totally candid and completely respectful. If they think the marketing piece is bad, they make sure, when they are done, that, you know, they think the marketing piece is bad, but they do so in a way that is 100% respectful as well. How, by finding a way to maintain safety without compromising candor. Maintain safety in order to speak honestly when honesty could easily offend others, we have to find a way to maintain safety. That's a bit like telling someone to smash another person in the nose, but you know, don't hurt him. How can we speak the unspeakable and still maintain respect? It can be done if you know how to carefully blend three ingredients, confidence, humility and skill. Confidence. Most people simply won't hold delicate conversations well, at least not with the right person. For instance, your colleague, Brian goes home at night and tells his wife that his boss, Fernando is micromanaging him to within an inch of his life. He says the same thing over lunch when talking with his pals, everyone knows what Brian thinks about Fernando, except, of course, Fernando, people who are skilled at dialog have the confidence to say what needs to be said to the person who needs to hear it. They are confident that their opinions deserve to be placed in the pool of meaning. They are also confident that they can speak openly without brutalizing others or causing undue offense. Humility, confidence does not equate to arrogance. Or pig headedness. Skilled people are confident that they have something to say, but also realize that others have valuable input. They realize that they don't have a monopoly on the truth. They are curious about information and perspectives. Others have their opinions provide a starting point, but not the final word. They may currently believe something, but realize that with new information, they may change their minds. This means they're willing to both express their opinions and encourage others to do the same skill. Finally, people who willingly share delicate information are good at doing it. That's why they're confident in the first place. They don't make a fool's choice, because they've found a path that allows for both candor and safety. They speak the unspeakable, and more often than you'd suspect, others are grateful for their honesty. Skill comes from practice and repetition. Yes, listening to this book and learning the skills of dialog is an important first step, but listening alone won't make you better at dialog. You have to start holding Crucial Conversations if you want to get better at holding Crucial Conversations, the missing money to see how to discuss sensitive issues, let's look at a difficult problem. Anita has just opened her wallet at the checkout stand. She reaches in to pull out the pair of 20s she is planning to use for the groceries she is buying. But wait, there's no money. She looks through the various compartments and still no $20 bills. She immediately turns to her 16 year old daughter standing next to her, then Anita barks in a loud voice, Amber. Where is it? Well, that was fast. It took Anita all of a half second to jump from I thought I had $40 in here to she rifled through my wallet and took my cash. Now, what's the worst way Anita might handle this? One that doesn't involve banishing her daughter to her bedroom with bread and water rations until she's 25 what's the worst way of talking about the problem? Most people agree that jumping in with an ugly accusation followed by a threat is a good candidate for that distinction. It's also what most people do, and Anita is no exception. I can't believe you would steal from me you want to spend the next decade in your room. She says in an aggrieved tone, Mom, what are you talking about? Amber asks, not knowing what Anita is referring to, but figuring that whatever it is, it can't be good. You know what I'm talking about? She says loudly. At this, Amber starts looking around and notices all the people are looking at them. Mom, she hisses. I don't know what you're talking about, but you need to calm down. People are staring. You took $40 out of my wallet and now you're acting all innocent. Anita is oblivious to the onlookers, as anyone who has ever done it will tell you, parenting teenagers is hard. Talking to them about wrongdoing is even harder. If Anita has reason to believe that Amber has taken money from her, she absolutely needs to address it, but making a heated accusation in a public place is not the best way to work through the issue. How should she talk about her worrisome conclusion in a way that leads to dialog state my path, if Anita s goal is to have a healthy conversation about a tough topic, for example, I think you're stealing from me. Her only hope is to stay in dialog, at least until she confirms or disproves her concerns. That holds true for anybody with any crucial conversation. For example, it feels like you micromanage me. I think you're using drugs. You throw me under the bus in the meeting. That means that despite your worst suspicions, you shouldn't violate respect. In a similar vein, you shouldn't kill safety with threats and accusations. So what should you do? Start with heart. Think about what you really want and how dialog can help you get it and master your story. Realize that you may be jumping to a hasty victim, villain or helpless story, the best way to find out the true story is not to act out the worst story you can generate that will lead to self destructive silence and violence games, think about other possible explanations long enough to temper your emotions so you can get to dialog. Besides, if it turns out you're right about your initial impression, there will be plenty of time for confrontations later on, once you've worked on yourself to create the right conditions for dialog, you can then draw upon five distinct skills that can help you talk about even the most sensitive topics. These five tools can be easily remembered with the acronym state it stands for share your facts, tell your story, ask for others. Paths, talk tentatively and. Encourage testing. The first three skills describe what to do. The last two tell how to do it. The what skills the best way to share your view is to follow the path to action. Model we learned in chapter five from beginning to end, the same way you traveled. It isn't it odd that we allow ourselves to move left to right along the path, but when we try to persuade others, we demand that they simply accept our feelings and stories without allowing them to do the same. When we're drunk on adrenaline, we lack either the wisdom or patience for reasoning. Since we're obsessing on our emotions and stories, we expect others to join us there. Starting with our ugly stories is the most controversial, least influential and most insulting way we could begin share your facts. Let's quickly review the path to Action Model. Remember it moves from left to right, beginning with what you see and hear, concrete experiences that begin your perception. Second, we tell a story. Third, we generate emotions, or feelings, and finally, we act. Our emotions influence our actions, see and hear, tell a story, feel, then act. When you want to state your path start on the left. The first step is to retrace your path to action, to the source, and find the facts, concrete evidence, such as things you have seen, heard or experienced directly. Anita can't find $40 in her wallet. That's a fact. She then told a story. The money isn't there because Amber stole it next, she felt betrayed and angry. Finally, she attacked Amber, you little thief. I thought I could trust you. The whole interaction was fast, predictable and very ugly. What if Anita took a different route, one that started with facts? What if she were able to suspend the ugly story she told herself by intentionally thinking of alternative, plausible stories, and then start her conversation with the facts. Wouldn't that be a safer way to go? Rather than planting a flag on the one story she generates, she assumes an attitude of curiosity, the fruit of humility, while she still has suspicions, she holds them tentatively for a moment while she explores other possibilities. How, by suspending the story and starting with the facts the missing money, facts are the least controversial. Facts provide a safe beginning by their very nature. Facts are less controversial. For example, consider the statement yesterday you arrived at work at 8:20am, little dispute there. Conclusions, on the other hand, are highly controversial. For example, you were 20 minutes late. Begins to include some story. It adds an assumption that you were expected to arrive at 8am another option you can't be trusted is hardly a fact. It's more like an insult, and it can certainly be disputed. Leaping from the 820 arrival to an assumption of tardiness to a story of unreliability moves us quickly from firm to questionable ground. Eventually, we may want to share our conclusions, but we certainly don't want to open up with a controversy start with areas of least disagreement before moving to those with most. Facts form the foundation for the conversation. Facts lay the groundwork for the conclusions that will come next. Facts become the starting point for the conversation and are less likely to spark offense. For example, which beginning is less offensive, stop sexually harassing me. Or when you talk to me, your eyes move up and down rather than look at my face. And sometimes you put your hand on my shoulder. We want the other person to allow our meaning to be added to the shared pool before it is. It has to get a fair hearing. We're trying to help others see how a reasonable, rational and decent person could end up with the story we're carrying. That's all when we start with shocking or offensive conclusions, quit groping me with your eyes, or I think we should declare bankruptcy. We encourage others to tell villain stories about us, since we've given them no facts to support our conclusion. People are left to make up reasons we're saying these things. They're likely to believe we're either stupid or evil. So if your goal is to help others see how a reasonable, rational and decent person could think what you're thinking, start with your facts. Take the time to sort out facts from conclusions. Gathering the facts is the homework required for Crucial Conversations. Also remember that you are sharing your facts. The skill here is to share your facts, not the facts you are sharing what you have seen and heard when. You acknowledge that these are your facts. You make space for other facts, things the other person may have seen and heard, sure you have done your homework thoroughly in gathering the facts, but you don't pretend to have all of the facts. Tell your story. We're often far too eager to tell our stories, our judgments and conclusions. Sometimes just laying out the facts is enough to invite people into helping you make sense of them. For example, if your boss has failed to talk to HR about a raise for you three times in a row, it might be enough to point out the string of lapses without adding I think you're either a coward or a liar, which is it. But by all means, if you do want to share your story, don't start with it. Your story, particularly if it has led to a rather harsh conclusion, could unnecessarily surprise or insult others. It could kill safety in one rash, ill conceived sentence. Brian, I'd like to talk to you about your leadership style. You micromanage me, and it's starting to drive me nuts. Fernando, what I ask you if you're going to be done on time, and you lay into me with if you start with your story, and in so doing, kill safety, you may never be able to actually get back to the facts. In order to talk about your stories, you need to lead the others involved down your path to action, let them experience your path from the beginning to the end, and not from the end to well, to wherever it takes you. Let others see your experience from your point of view, starting with your facts, followed by your story. This way, when you do talk about what you're starting to conclude, they'll understand why, first the facts, then the story, and make sure that as you explain your story, you tell it as a possible story, not as proven fact. Brian, the facts. Since I started working here, you've asked to meet with me twice a day. That's more than with anyone else. You've also asked me to pass all my ideas by you before I include them in a project. Fernando, what's your point? Brian, the possible story. I'm not sure that you're intending to send this message, but I'm beginning to wonder, if you don't trust me, maybe you think that I'm not up to the job, or that I'll get you in trouble. Is that? What's going on? Fernando, really, I was merely trying to give you a chance to get my input before you go too far down the path on a project. The last guy I worked with was constantly taking his project to near completion only to learn that he'd left out a key element. I'm trying to avoid surprises. Sharing your story can be tricky. You need to earn the right to share your story by starting with your facts, even then, the other person can still become defensive when you move from facts to stories. After all, you're sharing potentially unflattering conclusions and judgments. Why share your story in the first place? Because the facts alone are rarely worth mentioning. It's the facts plus the conclusion that call for a face to face discussion. In addition, if you simply mention the facts, the other person may not understand the severity of the implications. For example, I noticed that you had some of the new chip prototypes in your backpack. Yep, that's the beauty of these babies. They are tough enough to go anywhere. Those prototypes are proprietary. Well, they ought to be. Our future depends on them. My understanding is that they're not supposed to go home. Of course not. That's how people steal them. Sounds like it's time for a conclusion. I was wondering what the prototypes are doing in your backpack. It looks like you're taking them home. Is that what's going on here? It takes confidence. It can be difficult to share negative conclusions and unattractive judgments. For example, I'm wondering if you're a thief. It takes confidence to share such a potentially inflammatory story. However, if you've done your homework by thinking through the facts behind your story, you'll realize that you are drawing a reasonable, rational and decent conclusion, one that deserves to be heard. And by starting with the facts, you've laid the groundwork. When you think through the facts and then lead with them, you're much more likely to have the confidence you need to add controversial and vitally important meaning to the shared pool. Don't pile it on. Sometimes we lack the confidence to speak up, so we let problems simmer for a long time, given the chance, we generate a whole arsenal of unflattering conclusions. For example, you're about to hold a crucial conversation with your child's second grade teacher. The teacher wants to hold your daughter back a year. You want your daughter to advance right along with her age group. This is what's going on in your head. I can't believe this. This teacher is straight out of college, and she wants to hold Jade back. I don't think she understands the stigma of being held back. Worse still, she's quoting the record. Commendation of the school psychologist. The guy's a real idiot. I've met him and I wouldn't trust him with a common cold. I'm not going to let these two morons push me around. Which of these insulting conclusions or judgments should you share? Certainly not the entire menagerie of unflattering tales. In fact, you're going to need to work on this villain story before you have any hope of healthy dialog, as you do, your story will begin to sound more like this. Note the careful choice of terms. After all, it is your story, not the facts. When I heard your recommendation, my initial reaction was to oppose your decision, but after thinking about it, I've realized I could be wrong. I don't really have any experience about what's best for Jade in this situation, only fears about the stigma of being held back. I know it's a complex issue. I'd like to talk about how both of us can objectively weigh this decision. Look for safety problems as you share your story. Watch for signs that safety is deteriorating if people become defensive, step out of the conversation and rebuild safety by contrasting here's how it works. I know you care a great deal about my daughter, and I'm confident you're well trained. That's not my concern at all. I know you want to do what's best for Jade, and I do too. My issue is that this is an ambiguous decision with huge implications for the rest of her life. Be careful not to apologize for your views. Remember the goal of contrasting is not to water down your message, but to be sure that people don't hear more than you intend. Be confident enough to share what you really want to express. Ask for others paths. We mentioned that the key to sharing sensitive ideas is a blend of confidence and humility. We express our confidence by sharing our facts and stories clearly. We demonstrate our humility by then asking others to share their views and meaning it so once you've shared your point of view, facts and stories alike, invite others to do the same. If your goal is to keep expanding the pool of meaning, rather than to be right, to make the best decision, rather than to get your way, then you'll willingly listen to others views by being open to learning. You're demonstrating the curiosity that comes from true humility, a commitment to truth over ego. For example, you might ask, how do you see it? What's your perspective? Can you help me understand these open ended questions? Encourage others to express their facts, stories and feelings when they do carefully listen to what they have to say. Equally important, be willing to abandon or reshape your story as more information pours into the pool of meaning. When they do, carefully listen to what they have to say. Equally important, be willing to abandon or reshape your story as more information pours into the pool of shared meaning. Remember what you really want is to achieve valued results, not to gratify your ego by being right the how skills. Now that we've addressed the what skills in our state, list of tools, we turn our attention to the two how skills talk tentatively. If you look back at the vignettes we've shared so far, you'll note that we were careful to describe both facts and stories in a tentative or non dogmatic way. For example, I'm beginning to conclude that, or I'm tempted to think, talking tentatively simply means that we tell our story as a story, rather than disguising it as a hard fact. Perhaps you were unaware. Suggest that you're not absolutely certain of what the person knew, in my opinion, says you're sharing an opinion, and no more when sharing a story. Strike a blend between confidence and humility share in a way that expresses appropriate confidence in your conclusions while demonstrating that if called for you want your conclusions challenged, for example, change. The fact is to, in my opinion, or change. Everyone knows to I believe you might want to change. The only way to do this to, I am certain, or that's a stupid idea to I don't think it will work. Notice that the primary change from the first to the second examples I shared is not the degree of conviction expressed, but the level of honesty that this is simply your conviction. Even the only way to do this becomes more tentative. When saying I am certain, the first version sounds like a claim to absolute truth, the second acknowledges that this is simply your personal conviction. Talk tentatively is not about softening the message. It's about strengthening it. Remember your goal is to act. Add meaning to the pool, and it won't make it into the pool unless the other person consents to it. If you attempt to disguise your conclusions as facts, the other person is likely to resist rather than consider them, then nothing gets into the pool. One of the ironies of dialog is that when there's a difference of opinions, the more convinced and forceful you act, the more resistant others become. Speaking in absolute and overstated terms does not increase your influence, it decreases it. The converse is also true. The more tentatively you speak, the more open people become to your opinions. This raises an interesting question. Individuals have asked us, if being tentative is the same as being manipulative. You're pretending to be uncertain about your opinion in order to help others consider it less defensively, our answer to this is an unequivocal No. If you're faking tentativeness, you're not in dialog. The reason you should speak tentatively is because you aren't certain that your opinions represent Absolute Truth, or that your understanding of the facts is complete and perfect. You should never pretend to be less confident than you are, but you should also not pretend to be more confident than your limited capacity allows your observations could be faulty. Your stories well, they're only educated guesses, tentative, not wimpy. Some people are so worried about being too forceful or pushy that they err in the other direction. They wimp out by making still another fool's choice. They figure that the only safe way to share touchy data is to act as if it's not important. I know this is probably not true or call me crazy, but when you begin with a complete disclaimer and a tone that suggests you're consumed with doubt, you do the message a disservice. It's one thing to be humble and open. It's quite another to be clinically uncertain. Use language that says you're sharing an opinion, not language that says you're a nervous wreck, a good story. The Goldilocks test to get a feel for how to best share your story, making sure you're not overstating or understating your convictions, consider the following examples. Understated. This is probably stupid, but overstated. How come you ripped us off? Just right? It appears to me that you're taking this home for your own use. Is that right? Understated? I'm ashamed to even mention this, but overstated. Just when did you start using hard drugs? Just right. It's leading me to conclude that you're starting to use drugs. Do you have another explanation that I'm missing here? Understated, it's probably my fault, but overstated. You wouldn't trust your own mother to make toast. Just right? I'm starting to feel like you don't trust me. Is that what's going on here? If so, I'd like to know what I did to lose your trust. Understated, maybe I'm just oversexed or something, but overstated, if you don't find a way to pick up the frequency, I'm walking just right. I don't think you're intending this, but I'm beginning to feel rejected. Encourage testing. When you ask others to share their paths, how you phrase your invitation makes a big difference. Not only should you invite others to talk, but you have to do so in a way that makes it clear that no matter how controversial their ideas might be, you want to hear them. Others need to feel safe sharing their observations and stories, particularly if they differ from yours. Otherwise, people don't speak up and you can't test the accuracy and relevance of your views. Safety becomes particularly important when you're having a crucial conversation with people who might move to silence. Some people make fool's choices in these circumstances, for example, some leaders refuse to weigh in on issues because they worry they'll shut down the dialog. They worry that if they share their true opinions, others will clam up. So they choose between speaking their minds and hearing others out. But the best at dialog don't choose. They do both. They understand that the only limit to how strongly you can express your opinion is your willingness to be equally vigorous in encouraging others to challenge it. Invite opposing views. If you think others may be hesitant, make it clear that you want to hear their views, no matter how different. If their views disagree with yours, so much the better if what they have to say is controversial or even touchy, respect them for finding the courage to express what they're thinking. If they have different facts or stories you need to hear them to help complete the picture. Make sure they have the opportunity to share by actively inviting them to do so. Does anyone see it differently? What am I missing here? I'd really like to hear the other side of this story. Mean it. Sometimes people offer an invitation that sounds more like a threat than a legitimate call for opinions. Well, that's how I see it. Nobody disagrees, do they don't turn an invitation into a veiled threat. Invite people with both words and tone that say, I really want to hear from you. For instance, I know people have been reluctant to speak up about this, but I would really love to hear from everyone. Or I know there are at least two sides to this story. Could we hear differing views now, what problems could this decision cause us? Play devil's advocate. Occasionally, you can tell that others are not buying into your facts or story, but they're not speaking up either. You've sincerely invited them even encouraged differing views, but nobody says anything to help grease the skids played devil's advocate model disagreeing by disagreeing with your own view. Maybe I'm wrong here. What if the opposite is true? What if the reason sales have dropped is because our products truly are outdated? I know I've made the opposite case, but I really want to hear all the reasons my position could be dangerously wrong. Encourage others until your motive becomes obvious at times, particularly if you're in a position of authority, even being appropriately tentative doesn't prevent others from suspecting that you want them to simply agree with you, or that you're inviting them into a trap. This may be the case when former bosses or authority figures have invited people to speak and then punish them for doing so, this is where the skill of encouraging testing comes into play. As we said earlier, you can argue as vigorously as you want for your point of view, provided you are even more vigorous about encouraging others to disprove it the real test of whether your motive is to win a debate or engage in real dialog is the degree to which you encourage testing confidence against cancer. The state skills help us share our meaning respectfully and effectively. Learn how one crucial conversations trainer use these skills to speak up and have a voice when deciding on treatment for a serious medical diagnosis. See her story in the video confidence against cancer@crucialconversations.com back to the missing money to see how all the state skills fit together in a touchy conversation. Let's return to the mystery of the missing $40 Anita reviews what happened, and she and Amber are walking home from the store this time, Anita will do a far better job of bringing up a delicate issue. Anita shares facts. Amber, when I went to pay for the groceries just now, I was planning to use $40 that I thought I had in my wallet. Amber, uh huh. Anita shares facts, but when I opened my wallet, the money wasn't there. I thought it was strange, because I saw it there yesterday. Then I remembered you asking for some money last night to go out with your friends. I told you no, and you ended up going to a movie and dinner with them anyway. Amber, uh huh. Anita tentatively tells the story. Obviously, one possibility is that you took the money. Amber, you think I stole your money? Anita asks for others path. Honestly, I don't know what to think. All I know is what I just shared, and I hope you can see how I might at least have the question, did you Amber? Um, well, Anita, contrasting Amber, honey. I know you're a good kid, and I don't want to jump to hurtful conclusions. I also know people make mistakes. I did when I was your age. I want us to be able to talk about things, even hard things, honestly and openly, even when one of us is messed up Amber, I was planning to put it back. I wasn't trying to steal it. I didn't think you'd notice. Before I got my paycheck today, when this conversation actually did take place, it sounded exactly like the one portrayed the suspicious mother avoided nasty conclusions and ugly stories, shared facts and then tentatively shared a possible conclusion. As it turns out, her daughter had taken the money. They talked about it, and there were consequences for the theft. Amazingly, they also talked about the pressures that had led the daughter to take the money. Her mother learned more about what was going on in her daughter's life, and was able to give some gentle coaching on how to handle some tough situations. She gained influence in her teenage daughter's life that day because of how she tackled a tough conversation when strong belief weakens your influence. Now let's turn our. Attention to another communication challenge. This time, you're not offering delicate feedback or iffy stories, you're merely going to step into an argument and advocate your point of view. It's the kind of thing you do all the time. You do it at home, you do it at work, you do it on social media, and yes, you've even been known to fire off an opinion or two while standing in line to vote. Unfortunately, as stakes rise and others argue differing views, and you just know in your heart of hearts that you're right and they're wrong, you start pushing too hard. You simply have to win. There's too much at risk, and only you have the right ideas left to their own devices, others will mess things up. So when you care a great deal and are sure of your views, you don't merely speak. You try to force your opinions into the pool of meaning. You know, drown people in your truth. Quite naturally, others resist you. In turn, push even harder. We've watched this kind of thing happen all the time in our consulting work, for instance, seated around the table are a group of leaders who are starting to debate an important topic. First, someone hints that she's the only one with any real insight. Then someone else starts tossing out facts, like so many poisonous darts. Another it just so happens, someone with critical information retreats into silence as emotions rise words that were once carefully chosen and tentatively delivered are now spouted with an absolute certainty that is typically reserved for claims that are nailed to church doors or carved on stone tablets. In the end, nobody is listening. Everyone is committed to silence or violence, and the pool of shared meaning remains parched and tainted. Nobody wins. How did we get like this? It starts with a story. When we believe we're right and everyone else is wrong, we feel no need to expand the pool of meaning, because we own the pool. We also firmly believe it's our duty to fight for the truth that we're holding. It's the honorable thing to do. It's what people of character do. Our stories that portray others as narrow minded or dumb justify us in becoming controlling these poor people need saving. We tell ourselves soon we're modern day heroes crusading against naivete and tunnel vision. We feel justified in using dirty tricks. Once we're convinced that it's our duty to fight for the truth, we start pulling out the big guns we use debating tricks that we've picked up throughout the years, chief among them is the ability to stack the deck. We cite information that supports our ideas while hiding or discrediting anything that doesn't. Then we spice things up with exaggeration. Everyone knows that this is the only way to go. When this doesn't work, we lace our language with inflammatory terms. All right, thinking, people would agree with me. From there, we employ any number of dirty tricks. We appeal to authority. Well, that's what the boss thinks. We attack the person you're not so naive as to actually believe that we draw hasty generalizations. If it happened in our overseas operation, it happened here for sure. We attack a straw man, sure we can follow your plan if we want to offend our top customers and lose the business. And again, the harder we try and the more forceful and nasty our tactics, the greater the resistance we create, the worse the results and the more battered our relationships. How do we change the solution to employing excessive advocacy is actually rather simple, if you can just bring yourself to do it when you find yourself just dying to convince others that your way is best, back off your current attack and think about what you really want for yourself, others and the relationship. Then ask yourself, What should I do right now to move toward what I really want? When your adrenaline level gets below the point 05, legal limit, you'll be able to use your state skills. In fact, your willingness to use state skills in sharing your message is a reliable indicator of your interest in dialog. The harder it is for you to use them, the more likely your goal is to win rather than learn. When you find yourself wanting to simply announce the truth rather than engage in dialog. Use the skills you've learned up to this point. First, learn to look, watch for the moment when people start to resist you. Perhaps they begin to raise their volume and or overstate the facts behind their views in reaction to your tactics, or perhaps they retreat into silence. Turn your attention away from the topic, no matter how important and onto yourself. Are you leaning forward? Are you speaking more loudly? Are you starting to try to win? Are you hammering on your keyboard as you furiously type a comment? Remember, the more you care about an issue, the less likely you are to be on your best behavior second check your intent. What is your goal in the conversation? Do you want to be heard, understood or validated? Maybe you want to change the other person's mind. You can't control or determine what another person will think at the end of a conversation, but you can influence it. As you consider what you really want from the conversation, ask yourself, how would I behave if this is really what I want. For example, you and a co worker have been arguing about a recent high court ruling. No surprise there, as you and she are on opposite sides of the political spectrum, you feel passionately about this and want your co worker to change her views. So what is the best way to make that happen? It's probably not to yell, debate, disparage or rebut, after all, when was the last time you changed your mind after someone unloaded an insulting rant on one of your opinions? If you want to stand a chance at influencing people, you have to start by understanding them. So tone down your approach. Open yourself up to the belief that others might have something to say, and better still, they might even hold a piece of the puzzle and then ask them for their views. Back off your harsh and conclusive language, but don't back off your belief. Hold your belief merely soften your approach. My Crucial Conversation. Laurie A i A three years ago, my teenage daughter was diagnosed as bipolar. The manic highs and lows are incredibly frightening because they often turn violent, and the abyss of depression after a violent episode made me and my husband truly fear for our daughter's life with bipolar disorder, it takes a very long time to get the right combination of drugs to level the patient. Patients also have to be extremely consistent with their prescriptions. Of course, non prescription drugs and alcohol are forbidden during this difficult time. We had the police at our house to defuse the violence. We watched helplessly as she used drugs and alcohol and cut herself. She stopped going to school. We had her hospitalized. We prayed a lot. The good news is that I began using my crucial conversation skills during her manic highs and lows, and it worked. The contrasting statement was extremely effective, and still is in diffusing her anger and sadness later on, after she was level the state, my path skills became a literal life saver. I noticed that if I was careful to remove my judgments when I shared my concern and just state them factually, then encourage her to share her views, she could hear me much easier. With the help of crucial conversations, I was able to maintain a relationship with my daughter during a time in her life when she was hard to reach. Since her diagnosis and treatment, she has truly turned her life around. She takes her medication, changed her friendships, goes to therapy, asks for support from her teachers when she is feeling stressed in school, volunteers with special needs kids at church, and most importantly, talks to my husband and to me, as we face more challenges ahead, I can and will continue to use these skills in many ways. I believe you have helped us save her. Summary state my path when you have a tough message to share, or when you're so convinced of your own rightness that you may push too hard, remember to state your path, share your facts. Start with the least controversial, most persuasive elements from your path to action. Tell your story, explain what you're beginning to conclude. Ask for others' paths. Encourage others to share both their facts and their stories. Talk tentatively, state your story as a story, don't disguise it as a fact, and encourage testing. Make it safe for others to express differing or even opposing views. I. 